 single data point isn’t all that useful for understanding how 
something works, but neither is a big pile of stats. Context is the 
key to 
making metrics actionable
. But given all of the data and 
dashboards we’re dealing with, that process can be daunting. So how 
can you turn those numbers into something more—in an organized and 
thoughtful way?
I recently came up with a framework to help guide the process. The 
matrix, called TITE (
t
ime, 
i
nteractions, 
t
rends, and 
e
vents), takes both 
internal and external factors into consideration as well as influences and 
the need for comparison. I’ll explain each of these elements and, using a 
hypothetical example throughout the article, share how they can be used 
to transform data into a 
meaningful story
.
Quantify and qualify your data 
Before I get into the data matrix, let’s briefly talk about accessibility. It’s 
crucial that organizations not only know how to access data, but that they 
make it available and digestible to those who need it. DataShaka CTO 
Phil Harvey says the process of identifying and evaluating data sources, 
which he calls 
data landscaping
, is an important step companies need to 
take before they can even begin analyzing data.
Once you’ve got your data in hand, it’s time to think about extracting 
meaning. Most marketers have, at some point, heard about the 
SWOT matrix, a structure for evaluating the 
s
trengths, 
w
eaknesses, 
o
pportunities, and 
t
hreats involved in a new project or enterprise. It helps 
you understand how ideas relate to the world around you. In other words, 
it provides 
context
.
Here, I’ll show how the TITE matrix (shown below) can be used to look at 
atomic data, or the lower level of data, such as the individual items sold 
on a daily sales report. The matrix is divided into two main categories: 
source (where the data can be found, either internally or externally) and 
A
3
technique (how the data is being compared or what’s influencing it). 
These intersect to give us four key elements:
• 
Time:
 How is the data behaving week over week, month over month, 
or year over year (YoY)? Tracking the dips and spikes is an important 
first step in planning improvement.
• 
Interactions:
 How are potential customers interacting with your 
company’s properties, both online and offline? This is composed 
mainly of first-party data collection through platforms such as 
Google Analytics
.
• 
Trends:
 How does your company compare to competitors and 
industry trends in general? This comparison gives perspective to 
fluctuations in the data.
• 
Events:
 How are external events influencing your customers’ 
perceptions of and attitudes toward the company? This is mostly 
third-party data from tools like 
Google Finance
 and 
Google Trends
.
The TITE Matrix
IN
FLUENC
E
CO
MP
AR
IS
ON
TE
CHNIQU
E
Time
Interactions
Trends
Even
ts
A framework for
assigning context to data
4
Breaking down the data matrix
To better understand how the TITE matrix works, I’ll walk you through a 
hypothetical example to show how each of the elements can transform 
a data point into a more meaningful insight:
Meet Mark, the marketing director at WTMD, a retail company that 
specializes in computing devices for all categories: desktops, laptops, 
tablets, and smartphones. At the start of the year, he was asked to 
present 2014's results to Anne, WTMD’s vice president of marketing. 
Mark began his prep work by asking an analyst for the website’s sales 
revenue for each device category. While the numbers looked good 
initially, he couldn't be sure without adding a frame of reference, or 
context. That’s where the TITE matrix comes in.
Time
Mark looked at WTMD’s internal data over a period of 36 months. This 
allowed him to see if the company's performance was improving and if 
there were specific months that consistently decreased or increased YoY.
As a general rule, a data point on its own is not a useful piece of 
information. It only shows a limited view of something that’s happened. 
Comparing current data to data from previous time ranges is essential to 
understanding where a business stands and whether it’s growing or not.
If Mark, for example, learned that last year’s revenue was $1,750,000, 
would that be good? Well, that depends on several factors. The first 
question he should be asking is: How much was the revenue for the past 
three years in a row? That would show if WTMD’s revenue is rising or 
falling and if it’s within the business average.
Also, keep in mind that when looking at comparisons over time, it’s critical 
to account for seasonality, or patterns that repeat over time. For instance, 
January and February are slow months for consumer technology 
5
purchases. If Mark is analyzing his sales data during those months by 
looking at the previous eight weeks, he might think the company’s sales 
are in a sudden free fall. (November and December are big months for 
the company.) By comparing the same period YoY, he’s able to identify 
repeated behavior, as shown below in the comparison between the first 
eight weeks of 2014 and the first eight weeks of 2013.
Interactions
When Mark began looking at WTMD’s internal data, he also asked his 
team for all data related to interactions with the company's channels. 
He learned that while the website represented the majority of company 
sales, deals were also being closed via other channels. 
Today, companies understand the power of connecting interactions on 
the customer journey regardless of where they happen. Some are doing 
so through loyalty cards. So, for example, when WTMD customers use 
their loyalty card to purchase a consumer tech product, their behavior 
is logged into a central database, no matter if the purchases were made 
online, via an app, or in-store.
WTMD’s Consumer Tech Sales 
Chart showing seasonal sales data for the first eight weeks of 2013 and 2014.
2013
2014
Fe
b 28
Fe
b 1
Ja
n 1
6
This first-party data can be collected, analyzed, and optimized 
easily and accurately.
“Context is critical when analyzing data. It 
helps marketers make better decisions by 
drawing conclusions that are more meaningful 
and accurate.”
Tre n ds
Next, Mark used external data to learn how WTMD’s results compared 
to his competitors and the industry in general. He determined that while 
WTMD’s revenues were increasing an average of 9% YoY, the industry 
was growing at a slower rate of only 4% YoY. 
When analyzing changes in metrics, put them into perspective. If Mark 
saw that sales grew by 25% month over month, he might initially think 
this was cause for celebration. Before he asks his boss for a raise, 
though, he’d want to look at the market to see what’s going on in the 
industry. If his competitors saw an increase of 10%, his company is likely 
doing something right. But if the competition grew by 50%, he might not 
be so quick to crow about the results.
There are many approaches to analyzing trends data. We can use Google 
Analytics 
Benchmarking
 to see if increases (and decreases) are the result 
of our actions and how they align with larger trends in the industry. 
Another great option for adding context to your business data is to 
compare your stock to that of your competitors and across indexes, 
as shown below, based on Google Finance. 
7
Tracking Stock Trends for WTMD
Events
While conducting research for his presentation, Mark found that sales 
decreased during a particular month. Upon further investigation, he 
learned that a competitor’s in-store event had offered special deals.
Data is often influenced by external events—some of which can’t be 
controlled. For example, Mark might see a sudden increase in sales for a 
specific laptop after a celebrity is photographed carrying one. This kind of 
influence is hard to track.
News alerts and social media monitoring can help you tune into world 
chatter. You can also compare news events to stock fluctuations. 
Another option is to analyze trends and events (as shown below) in 
search data on Google and YouTube. These things provide context 
for those consuming the data.
For example, Mark could check out industry trends and see how sales 
for each device type are performing. Then, he could compare that 
information to WTMD’s own sales numbers.
Source: Based on Google 
Finance visualization
8
Ta
blet
2015
2013
2011
2009
2007
2005
Smar
tphone
Desk
to
p
La
pt
op
Make your data actionable 
Using the TITE matrix, Mark was able to provide context for the 2014 
numbers. He explained the oscillations in the data and provided Anne 
with real insight to guide the company’s 2015 strategy.
Context is critical when analyzing data.
 It helps marketers make 
better decisions by drawing conclusions that are more meaningful and 
accurate. And for data to be trustworthy, it must be comprehensive. 
In his book
Knowledge is Beautiful
, British data journalist David 
McCandless says context plays a key role in how well we understand 
information: “When you understand something, you’re able to perceive 
its structure: its connections, its relationships, its significance relative 
to everything else,” he writes. “Context, I’m realising, is the field of these 
connections, the network we plug any new information into. That 
Tech Trends and Events 
Source: Each of the circles on this chart (based on 
Google Trends
 data) corresponds to an event.
9
explains why, when something is contextualised, we can suddenly get it. It 
feels ‘meaningful’ to us because it fits into the network of what we already 
know and understand and can relate to. Our knowledge.”
As you’re creating context for your data to tell that meaningful story, keep 
these four things in mind:
• 
Compare data points
 to their predecessors to surface how the 
company’s performance is changing over time.
• 
Review all customer interactions.
 Make sure all touchpoints are 
being measured and reported to get a full view of the customer.
• 
Check in on industry trends
 so you can see how your company’s 
increases and decreases align with the averages.
• 
Be aware of industry events
 that can have an impact on 
your business.
