A data management plan or DMP is a formal document that outlines how you will handle your data both during your research, and after the project is completed.[1] The goal of a data management plan is to consider the many aspects of data management, metadata generation, data preservation, and analysis before the project begins; this ensures that data are well-managed in the present, and prepared for preservation in the future.

Contents

    1 Importance
    2 Major Components
        2.1 Information about data & data format
        2.2 Metadata content and format
        2.3 Policies for access, sharing, and re-use
        2.4 Long-term storage and data management
        2.5 Budget
    3 NSF Data Management Plan
    4 ESRC Data Management Plan
    5 References
    6 Further reading
    7 External links

Importance

Preparing a data management plan before data are collected ensures that data are in the correct format, organized well, and better annotated.[2] This saves time in the long term because there is no need to re-organize, re-format, or try to remember details about data. It also increases research efficiency since both the data collector and other researchers will be able to understand and use well-annotated data in the future. One component of a good data management plan is data archiving and preservation. By deciding on an archive ahead of time, the data collector can format data during collection to make its future submission to a database easier. If data are preserved, they are more relevant since they can be re-used by other researchers. It also allows the data collector to direct requests for data to the database, rather than address requests individually. Data that are preserved have the potential to lead to new, unanticipated discoveries, and they prevent duplication of scientific studies that have already been conducted. Data archiving also provides insurance against loss by the data collector.

Funding agencies are beginning to require data management plans as part of the proposal and evaluation process.[3]
Major Components
Information about data & data format

    Include a description of data to be produced by the project.[4] This might include (but is not limited to) data that are:
        Experimental
        Observational
        Raw or derived
        Physical collections
        Models
        Simulations
        Curriculum materials
        Software
        Images
    How will the data be acquired? When and where will they be acquired?
    After collection, how will the data be processed? Include information about
        Software used
        Algorithms
        Scientific workflows
    Describe the file formats that will be used, justify those formats, and describe the naming conventions used.
    Identify the quality assurance & quality control measures that will be taken during sample collection, analysis, and processing.
    If existing data are used, what are their origins? How will the data collected be combined with existing data? What is the relationship between the data collected and existing data?
    How will the data be managed in the short-term? Consider the following:
        Version control for files
        Backing up data and data products
        Security & protection of data and data products
        Who will be responsible for management

Metadata content and format

Metadata are the contextual details, including any information important for using data. This may include descriptions of temporal and spatial details, instruments, parameters, units, files, etc. Metadata is commonly referred to as “data about data”.[5] Consider the following:

    What metadata are needed? Include any details that make data meaningful.
    How will the metadata be created and/or captured? Examples include lab notebooks, GPS hand-held units, Auto-saved files on instruments, etc.
    What format will be used for the metadata? Consider the metadata standards commonly used in the scientific discipline that contains your work. There should be justification for the format chosen.

Policies for access, sharing, and re-use

    Describe any obligations that exist for sharing data collected. These may include obligations from funding agencies, institutions, other professional organizations, and legal requirements.
    Include information about how data will be shared, including when the data will be accessible, how long the data will be available, how access can be gained, and any rights that the data collector reserves for using data.
    Address any ethical or privacy issues with data sharing
    Address intellectual property & copyright issues. Who owns the copyright? What are the institutional, publisher, and/or funding agency policies associated with intellectual property? Are there embargoes for political, commercial, or patent reasons?
    Describe the intended future uses/users for the data
    Indicate how the data should be cited by others. How will the issue of persistent citation be addressed? For example, if the data will be deposited in a public archive, will the dataset have a digital object identifier (doi) assigned to it?

Long-term storage and data management

    Researchers should identify an appropriate archive for long-term preservation of their data. By identifying the archive early in the project, the data can be formatted, transformed, and documented appropriately to meet the requirements of the archive. Researchers should consult colleagues and professional societies in their discipline to determine the most appropriate database, and include a backup archive in their data management plan in case their first choice goes out of existence.
    Early in the project, the primary researcher should identify what data will be preserved in an archive. Usually, preserving the data in its most raw form is desirable, although data derivatives and products can also be preserved.
    An individual should be identified as the primary contact person for archived data, and ensure that contact information is always kept up-to-date in case there are requests for data or information about data.

Budget

Data management and preservation costs may be considerable, depending on the nature of the project. By anticipating costs ahead of time, researchers ensure that the data will be properly managed and archived. Potential expenses that should be considered are

    Personnel time for data preparation, management, documentation, and preservation
    Hardware and/or software needed for data management, backing up, security, documentation, and preservation
    Costs associated with submitting the data to an archive

The data management plan should include how these costs will be paid.
NSF Data Management Plan

All grant proposals submitted to NSF must include a Data Management Plan that is no more than two pages.[6] This is a supplement (not part of the 15 page proposal) and should describe how the proposal will conform to the Award and Administration Guide policy (see below). It may include the following:

    The types of data
    The standards to be used for data and metadata format and content
    Policies for access and sharing
    Policies and provisions for re-use
    Plans for archiving data

Policy summarized from the NSF Award and Administration Guide, Section 4 (Dissemination and Sharing of Research Results):[7]

    Promptly publish with appropriate authorship
    Share data, samples, physical collections, and supporting materials with others, within a reasonable time frame
    Share software and inventions
    Investigators can keep their legal rights over their intellectual property, but they still have to make their results, data, and collections available to others
    Policies will be implemented via
        Proposal review
        Award negotiations and conditions
        Support/incentives

ESRC Data Management Plan

Since 1995, the UK's Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) have had a research data policy in place. The current ESRC Research Data Policy states that research data created as a result of ESRC-funded research should be openly available to the scientific community to the maximum extent possible, through long-term preservation and high quality data management.[8]

ESRC requires a data management plan for all research award applications where new data are being created. Such plans are designed to promote a structured approach to data management throughout the data lifecycle, resulting in better quality data that is ready to archive for sharing and re-use. The UK Data Service, the ESRC's flagship data service, provides practical guidance on research data management planning suitable for social science researchers in the UK and around the world.[9][10]

ESRC has a longstanding arrangement with the UK Data Archive, based at the University of Essex, as a place of deposit for research data, with award holders required to offer data resulting from their research grants via the UK Data Service.[11] The Archive enables data re-use by preserving data and making them available to the research and teaching communities.


A data management plan (DMP) will help you manage your data, meet funder requirements, and help others use your data if shared.

The DMPTool is a web-based tool that helps you construct data management plans using templates that address specific funder requirements. From within this tool, you can save your plans, access MIT-specific information & resources, and request a review of your DMP by a member of our Data Management Services team. To access the MIT-customized DMPTool, choose “Massachusetts Institute of Technology” as your institution to log via Touchstone.

Alternatively, you can use the questions below and any specific data management requirements from your funding agency to write your data management plan. Additional resources for creating plans are also provided below.

     Project, experiment, and data description
        What’s the purpose of the research?
        What is the data? How and in what format will the data be collected? Is it numerical data, image data, text sequences, or modeling data?
        How much data will be generated for this research?
        How long will the data be collected and how often will it change?
        Are you using data that someone else produced? If so, where is it from?
        Who is responsible for managing the data? Who will ensure that the data management plan is carried out?
    Documentation, organization, and storage
        What documentation will you be creating in order to make the data understandable by other researchers?
        Are you using metadata that is standard to your field? How will the metadata be managed and stored?
        What file formats will be used? Do these formats conform to an open standard and/or are they proprietary?
        Are you using a file format that is standard to your field? If not, how will you document the alternative you are using?
        What directory and file naming convention will be used?
        What are your local storage and backup procedures? Will this data require secure storage?
        What tools or software are required to read or view the data?
    Access, sharing, and re-use
        Who has the right to manage this data? Is it the responsibility of the PI, student, lab, MIT, or funding agency?
        What data will be shared, when, and how?
        Does sharing the data raise privacy, ethical, or confidentiality concerns?  Do you have a plan to protect or anonymize data, if needed?
        Who holds intellectual property rights for the data and other information created by the project? Will any copyrighted or licensed material be used? Do you have permission to use/disseminate this material?
        Are there any patent- or technology-licensing-related restrictions on data sharing associated with this grant? The Technology Licensing Office (TLO) can provide this information.
        Will this research be published in a journal that requires the underlying data to accompany articles?
        Will there be any embargoes on the data?
        Will you permit re-use, redistribution, or the creation of new tools, services, data sets, or products (derivatives)? Will commercial use be allowed?
    Archiving
        How will you be archiving the data? Will you be storing it in an archive or repository for long-term access? If not, how will you preserve access to the data?
        Is a discipline-specific repository available? If not, you could consider depositing your data into DSpace@MIT. Email us at data-management@mit.edu if you’re interested in using DSpace@MIT to store your data.
        How will you prepare data for preservation or data sharing? Will the data need to be anonymized or converted to more stable file formats?
        Are software or tools needed to use the data? Will these be archived?
        How long should the data be retained? 3-5 years, 10 years, or forever?



Guidelines for Effective 
Data Management Plans
18
Appendix B: Sample Data Management Plan for 
Depositing Data with ICPSR
This sample plan is provided to assist grant applicants in creating the required Data 
Management Plans. Researchers should feel free to edit and customize this text before 
submission. Note that a letter of commitment from ICPSR confirming that it will archiv
e 
the data should accompany the plan. Please contact ICPSR Director of 
Acquisitions Amy 
Pienta, 
apienta@umich.edu
, to request such a letter.
Please review our 
guidelines on how to deposit data
 with ICPSR.
Dat
a Description
 – [Provide a brief description of the information to be gathered 
-- the nature, scope, and scale of the data that will be generated or collected.] These 
data, which will be submitted to ICPSR, fit within the scope of the 
ICPSR Collection 
Development Policy
. A letter of support describing ICPSR’s commitment to the data as 
they have been described is provided.
Designated Archive
 – The research data from this project will be deposited with the 
digital repository of the 
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
(ICPSR) to ensure that the research community has long-term access to the data. The 
integrated data management plan proposed leverages capabilities of ICPSR and its 
trained archival staff.
Access and Sharing
 – ICPSR will make the research data from this project available to 
the broader social science research community. 
Public-use data files
: These files, in which direct and indirect identifiers have been 
removed to minimize disclosure risk, may be accessed directly through the ICPSR 
Web site. After agreeing to Terms of Use, users with an ICPSR MyData account and an 
authorized IP address from a member institution may download the data, and non-
members may purchase the files. 
Restricted-use data files
: These files are distributed in those cases when removing 
potentially identifying information would significantly impair the analytic potential of the 
data. Users (and their institutions) must apply for these files, create data securit
y plans, 
and agree to other access controls. 
Timeliness
: The research data from this project will be supplied to ICPSR before the end 
of the project so that any issues surrounding the usability of the data can be resolved. 
Delayed dissemination may be possible. The Delayed Dissemination Policy allows for data 
to be deposited but not disseminated for an agreed-upon period of time (typically one 
year).
Metadata
 – Substantive metadata will be provided in compliance with the most relevant 
standard for the social, behavioral, and economic sciences -- the 
Data Documentation 
Initiative
 (DDI). This XML standard provides for the tagging of content, which facilitates 
preservation and enables flexibility in display. These types of metadata will be produced 
Guidelines for Effective 
Data Management Plans
19
and archived:
• 
Study-Level Metadata Record
. A summary DDI-based record will be created for 
inclusion in the searchable ICPSR online catalog. This record will be indexed with 
terms from the ICPSR Thesaurus to enhance data discovery. 
• 
Data Citation with Digital Object Identifier (DOI)
. A standard citation will be 
provided to facilitate attribution. The DOI provides permanent identification for the 
data and ensures that they will always be found at the URL specified.
• 
Variable-Level Documentation
. ICPSR will tag variable-level information in DDI 
format for inclusion in ICPSR’s Social Science Variables Database (SSVD), which 
allows users to identify relevant variables and studies of interest.
• 
Technical Documentation
. The variable-level files described above will serve as the 
foundation for the technical documentation or codebook that ICPSR will prepare 
and deliver.
• 
Related Publications
. Resources permitting, ICPSR will periodically search for 
publications based on the data and provide two-way linkages between data and 
publications. 
Intellectual Property Rights
 – Principal investigators and their institutions hold the 
copyright for the research data they generate. By depositing with ICPSR, investigators 
do not transfer copyright but instead grant permission for ICPSR to redisseminate 
the data and to transform the data as necessary to protect respondent confidentiality, 
improve usefulness, and facilitate preservation.
Ethics and Privacy
 – 
Informed consent
: For this project, informed consent statements, 
if applicable, will not include language that would prohibit the data from being shared 
with the research community. 
Disclosure risk management
: The research project will remove any direct identifiers in 
the data before deposit with ICPSR. Once deposited, the data will undergo procedures 
to protect the confidentiality of individuals whose personal information may be part of 
archived data. These include: (1) rigorous review to assess disclosure risk, (2) modifying 
data if necessary to protect confidentiality, (3) limiting access to datasets in which risk of 
disclosure remains high, and (4) consultation with data producers to manage disclosure 
risk. ICPSR will assign a qualified data manager certified in disclosure risk management 
to act as steward for the data while they are being processed. The data will be processed 
and managed in a secure non-networked environment using virtual desktop technology.
Format
 – 
Submission
: The data and documentation will be submitted to ICPSR in 
recommended formats
. 
Access
: ICPSR will make the quantitative data files available in several widely used 
formats, including ASCII, tab-delimited (for use with Excel), SAS, SPSS, and Stata. 
Documentation will be provided as PDF. 
Guidelines for Effective 
Data Management Plans
20
Preservation
: Data will be stored in accordance with prevailing standards and practice. 
Currently, ICPSR stores quantitative data as ASCII along with setup files for the 
statistical software packages, and documentation is preserved using XML and PDF/A.
Archiving and Preservation
 – ICPSR is a data archive with a nearly 50-year track 
record for preserving and making data available over several generational shifts in 
technology. ICPSR will accept responsibility for long-term preservation of the research 
data upon receipt of a signed deposit form. This responsibility includes a commitment to 
manage successive iterations of the data if new waves or versions are deposited. ICPSR 
will ensure that the research data are migrated to new formats, platforms, and storage 
media as required by good practice in the digital preservation community. Good practice 
for digital preservation requires that an organization address succession planning for 
digital assets. ICPSR has a commitment to designate a successor in the unlikely event 
that such a need arises. 
Storage and Backup
 – Research has shown that multiple locally and geographically 
distributed copies of digital files are required to keep information safe. Accordingly, 
ICPSR will place a master copy of each digital file (i.e., research data files, 
documentation, and other related files) in ICPSR’s Archival Storage, with several copies 
stored with partner organizations at designated locations and synchronized with the 
maste


Project Information 
This Data Management Plan (DMP) co
vers the data which will be collect
ed for a longitudinal study at the 
University  of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill.  The  
study  projected  to  be  conducted  between  January  1,  
2011  and  December  31,  2011.  The  study  will  collect  non-
sensitive  data  from  a  cohort  of  mixed-gender  
subjects  ranging  from  18  to  85  years  of  age.  No  ot
her  personal  identifiers  will  be  collected  during  the  
study apart from those identified above.  
The  study  will  focus  on  determining  subject  preference
  for  patronage  of  specific  fast  food  chains.  The  
subjects  will  be  randomly  selected  in  urban  and  
rural  public,  non-retail  locations  in  central  North  
Carolina, United States. Subjects who consent to partic
ipate will be anonymously surveyed by asking to 
respond to a simple yes/no, single question verbal survey. The results will be manually recorded by the 
surveyor. The data collected during this study will be ar
chived with H. W. Odum Institute for Research in 
Social Science located at the University of North Caro
lina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). The data will be stored 
in  a  specific  virtual  archive  and  will  be  made  
publicly  available  through  the  Odum  Institute  Dataverse  
Network  (DVN).  The  Odum  Institute  Data  Archive  is  
a  well-established  and  trusted  archive  in  the  social  
science field. As a member of the Data Preservation 
Alliance for the Social Sciences (Data-PASS) and the 
Library  of  Congress  National  Digital  Stewardship  Al
liance  (NDSA)  Odum  provides  a  strong  archival  and  
data distribution resource to the project.   
General Data Management Plan information 
This  DMP  was  created  on  December  1,  2010  for  subm
ission  to  the  National  Science  Foundation  as  
required by NSF guidelines in the interest of securing funding for this study. The aim and purpose of this 
DMP  is  to  detail  and  guarantee  the  preservation  of  the  
data  collected  during  this  study,  as  well  as  any  
results  derived  from  the  associated  research.  Th
is  DMP  is  intended  for  review  by  relevant  NSF  
personnel,  as  well  as  Odum  Institute  staff  and  UNC-CH
  staff  Odum  Institute  affiliated  directly  with  this  
study and the collection and preservation of the associat
ed data and research. This is the first iteration 
of this DMP associated with this data. 
Policies
There  are  no  requirements  stipulated  by  the  funding  or  partner  organizations  regarding  this  data.  
Comprehensive institutional and research group guidelines specified by UNC-CH were applied regarding 
the  collection  of  this  data.  There  are  no  addition
al  requirements  associated  with  the  data  being  
submitted. 
Legal Guidelines and Requirements 
ODUM INSTITUTE 
−
 DATA MANAGEMENT SAMPLE PLAN 
2 
This study will only collect non-sensitive data. No pers
onal identifiers will be recorded or retained by the 
researchers  in  any  form.  There  are  no  copyright  or
  licensing  issues  associated  with  the  data  being  
submitted. 
Access, Sharing and Re-use of Data 
The  researchers  associated  with  this  study  are  no
t  aware  of  any  reasons  which  might  prohibit  the  
sharing  and  re-use  of  the  data  being  submitted.  Th
e  researchers  are  not  required  to  make  this  data  
available  publicly  but  have  elected  to  do  so.  The  da
ta  being  submitted  will  be  made  publicly  available  
through the Odum Institute for Research in Social Sc
ience located at UNC-CH by January 1, 2013. There 
will  be  no  additional  restrictions  or  permissions  required  for  accessing  the  data.  Findings  will  be  
published by the researchers based on this data; the 
estimated date of publication is June 1, 2012. There 
is  an  agreement  regarding  the  right  of  the  original  
data  collector,  creator  or  
principal  investigator  for  
first  use  of  the  data.  The  specified  embargo  period  associated  with  the  data  being  submitted  extends  
from  the  projected  conclusion  date  for  initial  
research  (December  31,  2011)  until  six  months  after  
projected publication date for the fi
ndings (June 1, 2012). The embargo 
will be lifted by January 1, 2013. 
Data Standards and Capture 
The associated data types will be captured using Qual
trics survey software and analyzed using SPSS data 
analytics tools. The researchers are not aware of any 
issues regarding the effects or limitations of these 
formats regarding the data being submitted. 
Metadata 
General  metadata  related  to  the  survey  topic  wi
ll  be  created  for  the  data  being  submitted.  The  
associated  metadata  will  be  manually  created  in  
XML  file  format.  DDI  metadata  standards  will  be  
applied during the creation of the metadata.  
Security, Storage, Management and Back-Up of Data 
The Odum Institute’s experience with, and commitment 
to, secure data archiving is well established and 
is  in  keeping  with  established  
UNC  Information  Security  Policies
.  During  the  implementation  of  the  
survey,  associated  research  data  will  be  physicall
y  stored  on  a  password-protected  secure  server  
maintained  by  UNC-CH  using  standard  SPSS  file  form
ats.  No  data  will  reside  on  portable  or  laptop  
devices, and no other external media/format(s) will be used for data storage.  
Research  data  is  backed  up  on  a  daily  basis.  The  
researchers  are  currently  responsible  for  storage,  
maintenance  and  back-up  of  the  data.  The  specific  storage  volume  of  the  data  being  submitted  will  be  
not  more  than  1GB  maximum.  The  long-term  strategy
  for  the  maintenance,  curation  and  archiving  of  
the  data  will  be  implemented  when  the  data  and  associated  research  are  migrated  to  the  Odum  
Institute for archiving usin
g the Odum Institute DVN. 
Preservation, Review and Long-Term Management of Data 
ODUM INSTITUTE 
−
 DATA MANAGEMENT SAMPLE PLAN 
3 
Data  collected  during  this  study  will  be  archived  with
  the  Odum  Institute  at  UNC-CH.  The  data  will  be  
stored in a specific virtual archive and will be ma
de publicly available through 
the Odum Institute DVN. 
As  a  result  of  this  arrangement,  there  are  no  specif
ic  financial  considerations  of  which  the  researchers  
are  currently  aware  which  might  impact  the  long-term  management  of  the  data.  The  research  and  
archival staff of the Odum Institute will review this
 DMP upon accession of the data in order to ensure 
and demonstrate compliance. The DMP will again be re
viewed by Odum Institute research and archival 
staff prior to ingest and release into the Odum DVN


