Predictive analytics allows you to discover, analyze and act on data. It’s about learning from the past to uncover trends and predict likely outcomes. But that’s not all. Predictive analytics gives you a framework to analyze data over time, leading to more refined outcomes and corrective actions.

And using data to create a coherent view of the future has never been more important. The convergence of big data, time series data, social media, sensor data and mobile devices gives you the potential to add more fuel to your predictive analytics engine. Now it’s up to you to collect, manage and analyze this information – and position your organization for success.
Analytics Insights
Analytics Insights
Connect with the latest insights on analytics through related articles and research.
More on predictive analytics

    Drive your business with predictive analytics
    Three steps to putting predictive analytics to work

How it works

Predictive analytics combines techniques from statistics, data mining and machine learning to find meaning from large amounts of data. Whether you’re in marketing, compliance, customer service, operations or any other business unit, your data can show where you are – and predict where you’re going.

How do organizations approach predictive analytics? The key stages for an analytical life cycle include:

    Analytical data preparation – Source, clean and prepare the data for optimal results.
    Visualization and exploration – Explore all data to identify relevant variables, trends and relationships.
    Statistical analysis – Use everything from simple descriptive statistics to complex Bayesian analysis to quantify uncertainty, make inferences and drive decisions.
    Predictive modeling – Build the predictive model using statistical, data mining or text mining algorithms, including the critical capability of transforming and selecting key variables.
    Model deployment – Apply the new champion model, once validated and approved, to new data.
    Model management and monitoring – Examine model performance to make sure it is up-to-date and delivering valid results.

Predictive analytics in action

Marketing – From telecommunications to education to gaming and beyond, organizations need to forecast customer responses or purchases. Predictive models enable businesses to discover and attract the most profitable customers, helping maximize value from their marketing budget.

Risk – Credit scores assess a buyer’s likelihood to default on purchases like cars, homes or insurance. Credit scores are numbers generated by a predictive model that incorporates all data relevant to creditworthiness. Predictive analytics has other risk-related uses as well, including claims, collections, fraud and security.

Operations – To make an organization more efficient, you need to understand future needs and anticipate demand. Manufacturers need to manage inventory and factory resources. Airlines must decide how many tickets to sell at each price for a flight. Hotels try to predict the number of guests they can expect on a given night. Predictive analytics is at the heart of all of these operational decisions.


What is Predictive Analytics? Predictive analytics is the branch of the advanced analytics which is used to make predictions about unknown future events. Predictive analytics uses many techniques from data mining, statistics, modeling, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to analyze current data to make predictions about future. It uses a number of data mining, predictive modeling and analytical techniques to bring together the management, information technology, and modeling business process to make predictions about future. The patterns found in historical and transactional data can be used to identify risks and opportunities for future. Predictive analytics models capture relationships among many factors to assess risk with a particular set of conditions to assign a score, or weightage. By successfully applying predictive analytics the businesses can effectively interpret big data for their benefit.

The data mining and text analytics along with statistics, allows the business users to create predictive intelligence by uncovering patterns and relationships in both the structured and unstructured data. The data which can be used readily for analysis are structured data, examples like age, gender, marital status, income, sales. Unstructured data are textual data in call center notes, social media content, or other type of open text which need to be extracted from the text, along with the sentiment, and then used in the model building process.

Predictive analytics allows organizations to become proactive, forward looking, anticipating outcomes and behaviors based upon the data and not on a hunch or assumptions. Prescriptive analytics, goes further and suggest actions to benefit from the prediction and also provide decision options to benefit from the predictions and its implications.
Predictive Analytics Value Chain

Predictive Analytics Value Chain
Predictive Analytics Process
1.Define Project:

Define the project outcomes, deliverables, scoping of the effort, business objectives, identify the data sets which are going to be used.
2.Data Collection:

Data Mining for predictive analytics prepares data from multiple sources for analysis. This provides a complete view of the customer interactions.
3. Data Analysis:

Data Analysis is the process of inspecting, cleaning, transforming, and modeling data with the objective of discovering useful information, arriving at conclusions.
4.Statistics:

Statistical Analysis enables to validate the assumptions, hypotheses and test them with using standard statistical models.
5.Modeling:

Predictive Modeling provides the ability to automatically create accurate predictive models about future. There are also options to choose the best solution with multi model evaluation.
6.Deployment:

Predictive Model Deployment provides the option to deploy the analytical results in to the every day decision making process to get results, reports and output by automating the decisions based on the modeling.
7.Model Monitoring:

Models are managed and monitored to review the model performance to ensure that it is providing the results expected.
Predictive Analytics Process

Predictive Analytics Process
Prescriptive Analytics

Prescriptive Analytics automatically automate complex decisions and trade offs to make predictions and then proactively update recommendations based on changing events to take advantage of the prediction.
Applications of Predictive Analytics
1. Customer relationship management (CRM)

Predictive analysis applications are used to achieve CRM objectives such as marketing campaigns, sales, and customer services. Analytical customer relationship management can be applied throughout the customers life cycle, right from acquisition, relationship growth, retention, and win back.
2. Health Care

Predictive analysis applications in health care can determine the patients who are at the risk of developing certain conditions such as diabetes, asthma and other lifetime illnesses. The clinical decision support systems incorporate predictive analytics to support medical decision making at the point of care.
3. Collection Analytics

Predictive analytics applications optimize the allocation of collection resources by identifying the effective collection agencies, contact strategies, legal actions to increase the recovery and also reducing the collection costs.
4. Cross Sell

Predictive analytics applications analyze customers spending, usage and other behavior, leading to efficient cross sales, or selling additional products to current customers for an organization that offers multiple products
5. Fraud detection

Predictive analytics applications can find inaccurate credit applications, fraudulent transactions both done offline and , identity thefts and false insurance claims.
6. Risk management

Predictive analytics applications predicts the best portfolio to maximize return in capital asset pricing model and probabilistic risk assessment to yield accurate forecasts.
7.Direct Marketing

Predictive analytics can also help to identify the most effective combination of product versions, marketing material, communication channels and timing that should be used to target a given consumer.
8.Underwriting

Predictive analytics can help underwrite the quantities by predicting the chances of illness, default, bankruptcy. Predictive analytics can streamline the process of customer acquisition by predicting the future risk behavior of a customer using application level data.
Predicitve Analytics

Predicitve Analytics
Industry Applications

Predictive analytics is used in insurance, banking, marketing, financial services, telecommunications, retail, travel, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, oil and gas and other industries.
1.Predictive Analytics Software

SAS Predictive Analytics, IBM Predictive Analytics, SAP Predictive Analytics, RapidMiner, Angoss Predictive Analytics, GraphLab Create,  SAP InfiniteInsight, FICO Predictive Analytics, Salford Analytics, Oracle Data Mining (ODM), TIMi Suite, TIBCO Analytics, Alteryx Analytics, Alpine Chorus, KNIME, Actian Analytics Platform, Portrait, Predixion, Data Science Studio, H2O, Analytics Solver, STATISTICA, Viscovery Data Mining Suite, Lavastorm Analytics Engine, Rapid Insight Analytics, Advanced Miner, CMSR Data Miner Suite, GMDH Shell, Mathematica, MATLAB, and Minitab are some of the vendors of proprietary predictive analytics solutions in no particular order.

Click on the button below for a review of the top predictive analytics proprietary software solutions.

SAP Predictive Analytics

SAP Predictive Analytics

R, Orange, RapidMiner, Weka, GraphLab Create, Octave, Data Science Studio (DSS), H2O, Lavastorm Public Edition, Tanagra, PredictionIO, HP Distributed R, KNIME, scikit-learn, Actian Analytics Platform, Apache Spark MLlib, Apache Mahout, LIBLINEAR, Vowpal Wabbit, NumPy , and SciPy  are some of the key players in the freeware predictive analytics market in no particular order. Click on the button below for a review of the top predictive analytics freeware software solutions.

R

R
2.Predictive Analytics Software API

Google Prediction API, BigML, Microsoft Azure Machine Learning, Blue Yonder, Swift API, Datagami, GraphLab, Data Science Studio, Apigee Insights, Openscoring.io, Intuitics, Anomaly Detective, Zementis, Predixion, Datumbox Machine Learning Framework, PredictionIO, Logical Glue, Ersatz, H2O, Yottamine, Lattice, InsideView, AgilOne, Futurelytics, Fliptop, RelateIQ, Lumiata, Versium LifeData, Indico, INRIX are some of the Tops Predictive Analytics API in no particular order. Click on the button below for a  review of the top predictive analytics software API solutions:

Google Prediction API

Google Prediction API
3.Predictive Analytics Programs

 data science and predictive analytics programs.

You may also like to review the  business analytics programs list:
4.Predictive Lead Scoring Platforms

Lattice Engines, Fliptop, 6sense, Infer, Leadspace, Mintigo, Salesfusion, Versium, Wise, InsideSales, Lead Liaison, SalesPredict, Custora , Televerde, Futurelytics, Fiserv, Angoss KnowledgeSCORE, KXEN, Predixion, EverString are some of the companies who offer predictive lead scoring platforms in no particular order.

Infer

Infer
5.Predictive Pricing Solutions

Blue Yonder Dynamic Pricing , PROS Pricing Analytics, Zilliant MarginMax, Model N, ECOPA Prezzu, Upstream Commerce Dynamic Pricer, Retalon Dynamic Price Management System are some of the Predictive Pricing Solutions in no particular order.

6.Customer Churn, Renew, Upsell, Cross Sell Software Tools

RapidMiner, Marketo, Preact, Google Prediction API, Lattice Engines, Angoss, PROS Sales Optimizer, Fliptop , Alteryx Analytics, Alpine Chorus, 6sense, Gainsight, GraphLab Create, Predixion Insight, KNIME, Bluenose, Actian, RelateIQ, Zilliant, SalesPredict, Infer, AgilOne, Adobe Recommendations are some of the top customer churn, renew, upsell, cross sell software tools.

More Information on Predictive Analysis Process
Predictive Analytics Process Flow

Predictive Analytics Process Flow

For more information of predictive analytics process, please review the overview of  each components in the predictive analytics process: data collection (data mining), data analysis, statistical analysis, predictive modeling and predictive model deployment.


Predictive analytics is the branch of data mining concerned with the prediction of future probabilities and trends. The central element of predictive analytics is the predictor, a variable that can be measured for an individual or other entity to predict future behavior. For example, an insurance company is likely to take into account potential driving safety predictors such as age, gender, and driving record when issuing car insurance policies.


Multiple predictors are combined into a predictive model, which, when subjected to analysis, can be used to forecast future probabilities with an acceptable level of reliability. In predictive modeling, data is collected, a statistical model is formulated, predictions are made and the model is validated (or revised) as additional data becomes available. Predictive analytics are applied to many research areas, including meteorology, security, genetics, economics, and marketing.

Predictive analytics is a subset of data science. Recognition of the uniqueness of predictive analytics illuminates some interesting needs in research as is illustrated by Table 2.
Table 2. Examples of research in predictive analyticsComparative discipline	Dimension of interest	Predictive analytics research (examples)
Relevant	Less relevant
Statistics	Quantitative	Integrating quantitative and qualitative analysis	Improving Lagrange Multiplier tests for autocorrelation
Forecasting	Predicting the future	Using forecasting techniques for evaluating what would have happened under different circumstances	Deriving generalized estimators of seasonal factors
Optimization	Minimization and maximization	Assessment of the quality of the optimal solution and the ability to implement it versus near optimal solutions	Use of polyhedral functions in linear programming
Discrete event simulation	Quantitative analysis of a system in a stochastic setting	Discrete event simulation in a business process reengineering setting	Random number generation for discrete event simulation
Applied probability	Description of stochastic variables, expected values, and uncertainty	Applied probability along with application anchoring and framing affects from psychology	Asymptotic properties of Gaussian processes
Data mining	Search for patterns and relationships between a large number of variables with lots of data	Data mining preceded by logical and theoretical descriptions of possible relationships and patterns	Gibbs posterior for variable selection in data mining
Analytical mathematical modeling	Precise analysis using artificial and unrealistic assumptions for theorems and proofs	Methods of quickly and inexpensively modeling approximate relationships between variables while still using deductive mathematical methods	Proving inventory theorems that assume known, continuous demand with perfect information

Table 2 examines a sample of disciplines related to predictive analytics, selects a dimension of that discipline, and compares possible research topics and provides an example of a research area that would be more relevant to predictive analytics and an example of a research area that would be less relevant. Table 2 indirectly points to the distinction between predictive analytics and each of these quantitative disciplines. It also provides researchers with possible avenues of research that would be in the realm of predictive analytics.

Importantly, although predictive analytics is related to many long-standing quantitative approaches, it stands as distinct from each. Statistics is quantitative, whereas predictive analytics is both quantitative and qualitative. Forecasting is about predicting the future, and predictive analytics adds questions regarding what would have happened in the past, given different conditions. Optimization is about finding the minimum or maximum of a function, subject to constraints, whereas predictive analytics also concerns what would characterize a system that was not operating optimally. Analytical modeling is primarily about generating mathematical axioms and then proving lemmas and theorems, whereas predictive analytics attempts to quickly and inexpensively approximate relationships between variables while still using deductive mathematical methods to draw conclusions. These are some examples of the differences in emphasis between predictive analytics and well known quantitative disciplines.

The topics in Table 2 have been examined in part, but additional research in these relevant areas would advance predictive analytics' ability to refine and improve supply chain decision making. Indeed, the  of Business Logistics is interested in predictive analytics research that is relevant to logistics and SCM. To that end, we propose definitions of logistics and supply chain predictive analytics:

    Logistics predictive analytics use both quantitative and qualitative methods to estimate the past and future behavior of the flow and storage of inventory, as well as the associated costs and service levels.

    SCM predictive analytics use both quantitative and qualitative methods to improve supply chain design and competitiveness by estimating past and future levels of integration of business processes among functions or companies, as well as the associated costs and service levels.

What is defined here as logistics predictive analytics and SCM predictive analytics has already existed in the past, it just lacked a name. The idea is becoming so common that a name helps with communication about the concept. Reading Table 2 with these definitions in mind should provide a guide to appropriate research on logistics or SCM predictive analytics that would be of particular interest at the  of Business Logistics. Barton and Court (2012) highlight the growing value of advanced analytics:

    “Advanced analytics is likely to become a decisive competitive asset in many industries and a core element in companies' efforts to improve performance. It's a mistake to assume that acquiring the right kind of big data is all that matters. Also essential is developing analytics tools that focus on business outcomes … . (p. 81)