Main article: Outline of engineering

Lists

    List of engineering topics
    List of engineers
    Engineering society
    List of aerospace engineering topics
    List of basic chemical engineering topics
    List of electrical engineering topics
    List of genetic engineering topics
    List of mechanical engineering topics
    List of nanoengineering topics
    List of software engineering topics

Glossaries

    Glossary of engineering
    Glossary of areas of mathematics
    Glossary of biology
    Glossary of chemistry
    Glossary of physics

Related subjects

    Controversies over the term Engineer
    Design
    Earthquake engineering
    Engineer
    Engineering economics
    Engineering education
    Engineering education research
    Engineers Without Borders
    Forensic engineering
    Global Engineering Education
    Industrial design
    Infrastructure
    Mathematics
    Open hardware
    Reverse engineering
    Science
    Science and technology
    Structural failure
    Sustainable engineering
    Women in engineering
    Planned obsolescence


    Testability
    Maintainablity
    Integrity
    External integration is well defined
    Ethics
    Management

-TimTwelves

Testability - It is designed to have a repeatable test that can be performed to ensure that it is as expected. With bridge building, you could test the concerete, the steel, expansion and contraction in hot weather, etc.

Maintainability - It is designed to last. A bridge should last twenty years with a designed way to maintain the bridge or safely widen the bridge if so desired.

Integrity - It is designed to have structural integrity. A bridge will not just break in half. In memory state must not just become corrupt.

External integration - It is designed to have a particular well defined way to integrate with its environment without any confusion. A bridge takes cars. There is a sign that says the maximum tonnage and height of the bridge - no confusion.

Ethics - Act primarily in the best interests of (a) the above principles, (b) the users, and (c) the client. If the bridge is going to break and kill people, you cannot sign off on the construction.

Management - An engineer is proactively involved in the management of various responsibilities because the ultimate responsibility rests on the engineer. An engineer does not sit on the side listening to builders about bridge building. An engineer is actively involved in listening to builders and will let them do their speciality but is proactive in coordinating the various specialists towards the ultimate goal. Bridge building is typically managed by civil engineers - there are concrete and steel specialists but they are typically coordinated at a design level by the engineer, not by business.

Do not confuse engineering with architecture. An architect may design something without regard to engineering. It becomes the engineers job to build it according to engineering principles. In the context of software development, you could argue that the SoftwareDevelopmentLifeCycle is part of the responsibility of the management princple of a software engineer but it is certainly not the entire role of the engineer's management responsibility. 

By engineering principles we mean the ideas, rules, or concepts that need to be kept in mind when solving an engineering problem. However, there is no one specific list of engineering principles that can be written down or posted up on the web. That is because the concepts used to solve a problem will often be different depending on the type of problem encountered.

The engineer must be aware of this and consider the most important features of a design before she begins. For example, one often-noted principle in engineering design is "keep it simple" or "KISS (keep it simple stupid)". This is something that engineers must remind themselves to do when they imagine very fancy complicated products that few people would really be able to use. On the other hand, simple designs can't always meet the needs of the customer. Another principle might be to "keep the target user in mind" when creating a product. If the user does not want a simple solution, then an engineer will have to make a choice between those two principles.

Engineers designing a visual product will use principles of line, color, shape and form to make their design more visually pleasing, Others may not care what their product looks like, and will concentrate on principles like ease-of-use, or economy.

There are usually a lot of things to keep in mind when starting a new design. It is up to you to decide what those things should be and to choose the most important principles when you evaluate the product for your essay.
