data analytics statistical techniques predictive analytics 


Data analytics (DA) is the science of examining raw data with the purpose of drawing conclusions about that information. Data analytics is used in many industries to allow companies and organization to make better business decisions and in the sciences to verify or disprove existing models or theories. Data analytics is distinguished from data mining by the scope, purpose and focus of the analysis. Data miners sort through huge data sets using sophisticated software to identify undiscovered patterns and establish hidden relationships. Data analytics focuses on inference, the process of deriving a conclusion based solely on what is already known by the researcher.

The science is generally divided into exploratory data analysis (EDA), where new features in the data are discovered, and confirmatory data analysis (CDA), where existing hypotheses are proven true or false. Qualitative data analysis (QDA) is used in the social sciences to draw conclusions from non-numerical data like words, photographs or video. In information technology, the term has a special meaning in the context of IT audits, when the controls for an organization's information systems, operations and processes are examined. Data analysis is used to determine whether the systems in place effectively protect data, operate efficiently and succeed in accomplishing an organization's overall goals.

The term "analytics" has been used by many business intelligence (BI) software vendors as a buzzword to describe quite different functions. Data analytics is used to describe everything from online analytical processing (OLAP) to CRM analytics in call centers. Banks and credit cards companies, for instance, analyze withdrawal and spending patterns to prevent fraud or identity theft. Ecommerce companies examine Web site traffic or navigation patterns to determine which customers are more or less likely to buy a product or service based upon prior purchases or viewing trends. Modern data analytics often use information dashboards supported by real-time data streams. So-called real-time analytics involves dynamic analysis and reporting, based on data entered into a system less than one minute before the actual time of use.

Big data analytics examines large amounts of data to uncover hidden patterns, correlations and other insights. With today’s technology, it’s possible to analyze your data and get answers from it almost immediately – an effort that’s slower and less efficient with more traditional business intelligence solutions.


Big data analytics is the process of collecting, organizing and analyzing large sets of data (called big data) to discover patterns and other useful information. Big data analytics can help organizations to better understand the information contained within the data and will also help identify the data that is most important to the business and future business decisions. Analysts working with big data basically want the knowledge that comes from analyzing the data.


To analyze such a large volume of data, big data analytics is typically performed using specialized software tools and applications for predictive analytics, data mining, text mining, forecasting and data optimization. Collectively these processes are separate but highly integrated functions of high-performance analytics. Using big data tools and software enables an organization to process extremely large volumes of data that a business has collected to determine which data is relevant and can be analyzed to drive better business decisions in the future.


Predictive analytics is the practice of extracting information from existing data sets in order to determine patterns and predict future outcomes and trends.  Predictive analytics does not tell you what will happen in the future. It forecasts what might happen in the future with an acceptable level of reliability, and includes what-if scenarios and risk assessment.
Predictive Models and Analysis Applied to Business

Predictive models and analysis are typically used to forecast future probabilities. Applied to business, predictive models are used to analyze current data and historical facts in order to better understand customers, products and partners and to identify potential risks and opportunities for a company. It uses a number of techniques, including data mining, statistical modeling and machine learning to help analysts make future business forecasts.


Predictive analytics encompasses a variety of statistical techniques from predictive modeling, machine learning, and data mining that analyze current and historical facts to make predictions about future or otherwise unknown events.[1][2][3]

In business, predictive models exploit patterns found in historical and transactional data to identify risks and opportunities. Models capture relationships among many factors to allow assessment of risk or potential associated with a particular set of conditions, guiding decision making for candidate transactions.[4]

The defining functional effect of these technical approaches is that predictive analytics provides a predictive score (probability) for each individual (customer, employee, healthcare patient, product SKU, vehicle, component, machine, or other organizational unit) in order to determine, inform, or influence organizational processes that pertain across large numbers of individuals, such as in marketing, credit risk assessment, fraud detection, manufacturing, healthcare, and government operations including law enforcement.

Predictive analytics is used in actuarial science,[5] marketing,[1][6] financial services,[7] insurance, telecommunications,[8] retail,[9] travel,[10] healthcare,[11] child protection,[12][13] pharmaceuticals,[14] capacity planning[citation needed] and other fields.

One of the most well known applications is credit scoring,[2] which is used throughout financial services. Scoring models process a customer's credit history, loan application, customer data, etc., in order to rank-order individuals by their likelihood of making future credit payments on time.

Contents

    1 Definition
    2 Types
        2.1 Predictive models
        2.2 Descriptive models
        2.3 Decision models
    3 Applications
        3.1 Analytical customer relationship management (CRM)
        3.2 Child protection
        3.3 Clinical decision support systems
        3.4 Collection analytics
        3.5 Cross-sell
        3.6 Customer retention
        3.7 Direct marketing
        3.8 Fraud detection
        3.9 Portfolio, product or economy-level prediction
        3.10 Risk management
        3.11 Underwriting
    4 Technology and big data influences
    5 Analytical Techniques
        5.1 Regression techniques
            5.1.1 Linear regression model
            5.1.2 Discrete choice models
            5.1.3 Logistic regression
            5.1.4 Multinomial logistic regression
            5.1.5 Probit regression
            5.1.6 Logit versus probit
            5.1.7 Time series models
            5.1.8 Survival or duration analysis
            5.1.9 Classification and regression trees (CART)
            5.1.10 Multivariate adaptive regression splines
        5.2 Machine learning techniques
            5.2.1 Neural networks
            5.2.2 Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
            5.2.3 Radial basis functions
            5.2.4 Support vector machines
            5.2.5 Naïve Bayes
            5.2.6 k-nearest neighbours
            5.2.7 Geospatial predictive modeling
    6 Tools
        6.1 PMML
    7 Criticism
    8 See also
    9 References
    10 Further reading

Definition

Predictive analytics is an area of data mining that deals with extracting information from data and using it to predict trends and behavior patterns.[1] Often the unknown event of interest is in the future, but predictive analytics can be applied to any type of unknown whether it be in the past, present or future. For example, identifying suspects after a crime has been committed, or credit card fraud as it occurs.[15] The core of predictive analytics relies on capturing relationships between explanatory variables and the predicted variables from past occurrences, and exploiting them to predict the unknown outcome. It is important to note, however, that the accuracy and usability of results will depend greatly on the level of data analysis and the quality of assumptions.

Predictive analytics is often defined as predicting at a more detailed level of granularity, i.e., generating predictive scores (probabilities) for each individual organizational element. This distinguishes it from forecasting. For example, "Predictive analytics—Technology that learns from experience (data) to predict the future behavior of individuals in order to drive better decisions."[16] In the future industrial systems the value of Predictive Analytics is to predict and prevent potential issues to achieve near-zero break-down and further be integrated into prescriptive analytics for decision optimization. Furthermore, the converted data can be used for closed-loop product life cycle improvement[17] which is the vision of Industrial Internet Consortium.
Types

Generally, the term predictive analytics is used to mean predictive modeling, "scoring" data with predictive models, and forecasting. However, people are increasingly using the term to refer to related analytical disciplines, such as descriptive modeling and decision modeling or optimization. These disciplines also involve rigorous data analysis, and are widely used in business for segmentation and decision making, but have different purposes and the statistical techniques underlying them vary.
Predictive models

Predictive models are models of the relation between the specific performance of a unit in a sample and one or more known attributes or features of the unit. The objective of the model is to assess the likelihood that a similar unit in a different sample will exhibit the specific performance. This category encompasses models in many areas, such as marketing, where they seek out subtle data patterns to answer questions about customer performance, or fraud detection models. Predictive models often perform calculations during live transactions, for example, to evaluate the risk or opportunity of a given customer or transaction, in order to guide a decision. With advancements in computing speed, individual agent modeling systems have become capable of simulating human behaviour or reactions to given stimuli or scenarios.

The available sample units with known attributes and known performances is referred to as the “training sample.” The units in other samples, with known attributes but unknown performances, are referred to as “out of [training] sample” units. The out of sample bear no chronological relation to the training sample units. For example, the training sample may consists of literary attributes of writings by Victorian authors, with known attribution, and the out-of sample unit may be newly found writing with unknown authorship; a predictive model may aid in attributing a work to a known author. Another example is given by analysis of blood splatter in simulated crime scenes in which the out of sample unit is the actual blood splatter pattern from a crime scene. The out of sample unit may be from the same time as the training units, from a previous time, or from a future time.
Descriptive models

Descriptive models quantify relationships in data in a way that is often used to classify customers or prospects into groups. Unlike predictive models that focus on predicting a single customer behavior (such as credit risk), descriptive models identify many different relationships between customers or products. Descriptive models do not rank-order customers by their likelihood of taking a particular action the way predictive models do. Instead, descriptive models can be used, for example, to categorize customers by their product preferences and life stage. Descriptive modeling tools can be utilized to develop further models that can simulate large number of individualized agents and make predictions.
Decision models

Decision models describe the relationship between all the elements of a decision — the known data (including results of predictive models), the decision, and the forecast results of the decision — in order to predict the results of decisions involving many variables. These models can be used in optimization, maximizing certain outcomes while minimizing others. Decision models are generally used to develop decision logic or a set of business rules that will produce the desired action for every customer or circumstance.
Applications

Although predictive analytics can be put to use in many applications, we outline a few examples where predictive analytics has shown positive impact in recent years.
Analytical customer relationship management (CRM)

Analytical Customer Relationship Management is a frequent commercial application of Predictive Analysis. Methods of predictive analysis are applied to customer data to pursue CRM objectives, which involve constructing a holistic view of the customer no matter where their information resides in the company or the department involved. CRM uses predictive analysis in applications for marketing campaigns, sales, and customer services to name a few. These tools are required in order for a company to posture and focus their efforts effectively across the breadth of their customer base. They must analyze and understand the products in demand or have the potential for high demand, predict customers' buying habits in order to promote relevant products at multiple touch points, and proactively identify and mitigate issues that have the potential to lose customers or reduce their ability to gain new ones. Analytical Customer Relationship Management can be applied throughout the customers lifecycle (acquisition, relationship growth, retention, and win-back). Several of the application areas described below (direct marketing, cross-sell, customer retention) are part of Customer Relationship Managements.
Child protection

Over the last 5 years, some Child Welfare Agencies have started using predictive analytics to flag high risk cases.[18] The approach has been called "innovative" by the Commission to Eliminate Child Abuse and Neglect Fatalities (CECANF),[19] and in Hillsborough County, FL, where the Lead Child Welfare Agency uses a predictive modeling tool called Eckerd Rapid Safety Feedback®, there have been no abuse-related child deaths in the target population as of this writing.[20]
Clinical decision support systems

Experts use predictive analysis in health care primarily to determine which patients are at risk of developing certain conditions, like diabetes, asthma, heart disease, and other lifetime illnesses. Additionally, sophisticated clinical decision support systems incorporate predictive analytics to support medical decision making at the point of care. A working definition has been proposed by Robert Hayward of the Centre for Health Evidence: "Clinical Decision Support Systems link health observations with health knowledge to influence health choices by clinicians for improved health care."[citation needed]
Collection analytics

Many portfolios have a set of delinquent customers who do not make their payments on time. The financial institution has to undertake collection activities on these customers to recover the amounts due. A lot of collection resources are wasted on customers who are difficult or impossible to recover. Predictive analytics can help optimize the allocation of collection resources by identifying the most effective collection agencies, contact strategies, legal actions and other strategies to each customer, thus significantly increasing recovery at the same time reducing collection costs.
Cross-sell

Often corporate organizations collect and maintain abundant data (e.g. customer records, sale transactions) as exploiting hidden relationships in the data can provide a competitive advantage. For an organization that offers multiple products, predictive analytics can help analyze customers' spending, usage and other behavior, leading to efficient cross sales, or selling additional products to current customers.[3] This directly leads to higher profitability per customer and stronger customer relationships.
Customer retention

With the number of competing services available, businesses need to focus efforts on maintaining continuous consumer satisfaction, rewarding consumer loyalty and minimizing customer attrition. In addition, small increases in customer retention have been shown to increase profits disproportionately. One study concluded that a 5% increase in customer retention rates will increase profits by 25% to 95%.[21] Businesses tend to respond to customer attrition on a reactive basis, acting only after the customer has initiated the process to terminate service. At this stage, the chance of changing the customer's decision is almost zero. Proper application of predictive analytics can lead to a more proactive retention strategy. By a frequent examination of a customer’s past service usage, service performance, spending and other behavior patterns, predictive models can determine the likelihood of a customer terminating service sometime soon.[8] An intervention with lucrative offers can increase the chance of retaining the customer. Silent attrition, the behavior of a customer to slowly but steadily reduce usage, is another problem that many companies face. Predictive analytics can also predict this behavior, so that the company can take proper actions to increase customer activity.
Direct marketing

When marketing consumer products and services, there is the challenge of keeping up with competing products and consumer behavior. Apart from identifying prospects, predictive analytics can also help to identify the most effective combination of product versions, marketing material, communication channels and timing that should be used to target a given consumer. The goal of predictive analytics is typically to lower the cost per order or cost per action.
Fraud detection

Fraud is a big problem for many businesses and can be of various types: inaccurate credit applications, fraudulent transactions (both offline and online), identity thefts and false insurance claims. These problems plague firms of all sizes in many industries. Some examples of likely victims are credit card issuers, insurance companies,[22] retail merchants, manufacturers, business-to-business suppliers and even services providers. A predictive model can help weed out the "bads" and reduce a business's exposure to fraud.

Predictive modeling can also be used to identify high-risk fraud candidates in business or the public sector. Mark Nigrini developed a risk-scoring method to identify audit targets. He describes the use of this approach to detect fraud in the franchisee sales reports of an international fast-food chain. Each location is scored using 10 predictors. The 10 scores are then weighted to give one final overall risk score for each location. The same scoring approach was also used to identify high-risk check kiting accounts, potentially fraudulent travel agents, and questionable vendors. A reasonably complex model was used to identify fraudulent monthly reports submitted by divisional controllers.[23]

The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of the United States also uses predictive analytics to mine tax returns and identify tax fraud.[22]

Recent[when?] advancements in technology have also introduced predictive behavior analysis for web fraud detection. This type of solution utilizes heuristics in order to study normal web user behavior and detect anomalies indicating fraud attempts.
Portfolio, product or economy-level prediction

Often the focus of analysis is not the consumer but the product, portfolio, firm, industry or even the economy. For example, a retailer might be interested in predicting store-level demand for inventory management purposes. Or the Federal Reserve Board might be interested in predicting the unemployment rate for the next year. These types of problems can be addressed by predictive analytics using time series techniques (see below). They can also be addressed via machine learning approaches which transform the original time series into a feature vector space, where the learning algorithm finds patterns that have predictive power.[24][25]
Risk management

When employing risk management techniques, the results are always to predict and benefit from a future scenario. The Capital asset pricing model (CAP-M) "predicts" the best portfolio to maximize return, Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA)--when combined with mini-Delphi Techniques and statistical approaches yields accurate forecasts and RiskAoA is a stand-alone predictive tool.[26] These are three examples of approaches that can extend from project to market, and from near to long term. Underwriting (see below) and other business approaches identify risk management as a predictive method.
Underwriting

Many businesses have to account for risk exposure due to their different services and determine the cost needed to cover the risk. For example, auto insurance providers need to accurately determine the amount of premium to charge to cover each automobile and driver. A financial company needs to assess a borrower's potential and ability to pay before granting a loan. For a health insurance provider, predictive analytics can analyze a few years of past medical claims data, as well as lab, pharmacy and other records where available, to predict how expensive an enrollee is likely to be in the future. Predictive analytics can help underwrite these quantities by predicting the chances of illness, default, bankruptcy, etc. Predictive analytics can streamline the process of customer acquisition by predicting the future risk behavior of a customer using application level data.[5] Predictive analytics in the form of credit scores have reduced the amount of time it takes for loan approvals, especially in the mortgage market where lending decisions are now made in a matter of hours rather than days or even weeks. Proper predictive analytics can lead to proper pricing decisions, which can help mitigate future risk of default.
Technology and big data influences

Big data is a collection of data sets that are so large and complex that they become awkward to work with using traditional database management tools. The volume, variety and velocity of big data have introduced challenges across the board for capture, storage, search, sharing, analysis, and visualization. Examples of big data sources include web logs, RFID, sensor data, social networks, Internet search indexing, call detail records, military surveillance, and complex data in astronomic, biogeochemical, genomics, and atmospheric sciences. Big Data is the core of most predictive analytic services offered by IT organizations.[27] Thanks to technological advances in computer hardware — faster CPUs, cheaper memory, and MPP architectures — and new technologies such as Hadoop, MapReduce, and in-database and text analytics for processing big data, it is now feasible to collect, analyze, and mine massive amounts of structured and unstructured data for new insights.[22] It is also possible to run predictive algorithms on streaming data.[28] Today, exploring big data and using predictive analytics is within reach of more organizations than ever before and new methods that are capable for handling such datasets are proposed [29] [30]
Analytical Techniques

The approaches and techniques used to conduct predictive analytics can broadly be grouped into regression techniques and machine learning techniques.
Regression techniques

Regression models are the mainstay of predictive analytics. The focus lies on establishing a mathematical equation as a model to represent the interactions between the different variables in consideration. Depending on the situation, there are a wide variety of models that can be applied while performing predictive analytics. Some of them are briefly discussed below.
Linear regression model

The linear regression model analyzes the relationship between the response or dependent variable and a set of independent or predictor variables. This relationship is expressed as an equation that predicts the response variable as a linear function of the parameters. These parameters are adjusted so that a measure of fit is optimized. Much of the effort in model fitting is focused on minimizing the size of the residual, as well as ensuring that it is randomly distributed with respect to the model predictions.

The goal of regression is to select the parameters of the model so as to minimize the sum of the squared residuals. This is referred to as ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation and results in best linear unbiased estimates (BLUE) of the parameters if and only if the Gauss-Markov assumptions are satisfied.

Once the model has been estimated we would be interested to know if the predictor variables belong in the model – i.e. is the estimate of each variable's contribution reliable? To do this we can check the statistical significance of the model’s coefficients which can be measured using the t-statistic. This amounts to testing whether the coefficient is significantly different from zero. How well the model predicts the dependent variable based on the value of the independent variables can be assessed by using the R² statistic. It measures predictive power of the model i.e. the proportion of the total variation in the dependent variable that is "explained" (accounted for) by variation in the independent variables.
Discrete choice models

Multivariate regression (above) is generally used when the response variable is continuous and has an unbounded range. Often the response variable may not be continuous but rather discrete. While mathematically it is feasible to apply multivariate regression to discrete ordered dependent variables, some of the assumptions behind the theory of multivariate linear regression no longer hold, and there are other techniques such as discrete choice models which are better suited for this type of analysis. If the dependent variable is discrete, some of those superior methods are logistic regression, multinomial logit and probit models. Logistic regression and probit models are used when the dependent variable is binary.
Logistic regression
For more details on this topic, see logistic regression.

In a classification setting, assigning outcome probabilities to observations can be achieved through the use of a logistic model, which is basically a method which transforms information about the binary dependent variable into an unbounded continuous variable and estimates a regular multivariate model (See Allison's Logistic Regression for more information on the theory of Logistic Regression).

The Wald and likelihood-ratio test are used to test the statistical significance of each coefficient b in the model (analogous to the t tests used in OLS regression; see above). A test assessing the goodness-of-fit of a classification model is the "percentage correctly predicted".
Multinomial logistic regression

An extension of the binary logit model to cases where the dependent variable has more than 2 categories is the multinomial logit model. In such cases collapsing the data into two categories might not make good sense or may lead to loss in the richness of the data. The multinomial logit model is the appropriate technique in these cases, especially when the dependent variable categories are not ordered (for examples colors like red, blue, green). Some authors have extended multinomial regression to include feature selection/importance methods such as Random multinomial logit.
Probit regression

Probit models offer an alternative to logistic regression for modeling categorical dependent variables. Even though the outcomes tend to be similar, the underlying distributions are different. Probit models are popular in social sciences like economics.

A good way to understand the key difference between probit and logit models is to assume that the dependent variable is driven by a latent variable z, which is a sum of a linear combination of explanatory variables and a random noise term.

We do not observe z but instead observe y which takes the value 0 (when z < 0) or 1 (otherwise). In the logit model we assume that the random noise term follows a logistic distribution with mean zero. In the probit model we assume that it follows a normal distribution with mean zero. Note that in social sciences (e.g. economics), probit is often used to model situations where the observed variable y is continuous but takes values between 0 and 1.
Logit versus probit

The Probit model has been around longer than the logit model. They behave similarly, except that the logistic distribution tends to be slightly flatter tailed. One of the reasons the logit model was formulated was that the probit model was computationally difficult due to the requirement of numerically calculating integrals. Modern computing however has made this computation fairly simple. The coefficients obtained from the logit and probit model are fairly close. However, the odds ratio is easier to interpret in the logit model.

Practical reasons for choosing the probit model over the logistic model would be:

    There is a strong belief that the underlying distribution is normal
    The actual event is not a binary outcome (e.g., bankruptcy status) but a proportion (e.g., proportion of population at different debt levels).

Time series models

Time series models are used for predicting or forecasting the future behavior of variables. These models account for the fact that data points taken over time may have an internal structure (such as autocorrelation, trend or seasonal variation) that should be accounted for. As a result, standard regression techniques cannot be applied to time series data and methodology has been developed to decompose the trend, seasonal and cyclical component of the series. Modeling the dynamic path of a variable can improve forecasts since the predictable component of the series can be projected into the future.

Time series models estimate difference equations containing stochastic components. Two commonly used forms of these models are autoregressive models (AR) and moving-average (MA) models. The Box–Jenkins methodology (1976) developed by George Box and G.M. Jenkins combines the AR and MA models to produce the ARMA (autoregressive moving average) model which is the cornerstone of stationary time series analysis. ARIMA (autoregressive integrated moving average models) on the other hand are used to describe non-stationary time series. Box and Jenkins suggest differencing a non stationary time series to obtain a stationary series to which an ARMA model can be applied. Non stationary time series have a pronounced trend and do not have a constant long-run mean or variance.

Box and Jenkins proposed a three-stage methodology which includes: model identification, estimation and validation. The identification stage involves identifying if the series is stationary or not and the presence of seasonality by examining plots of the series, autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation functions. In the estimation stage, models are estimated using non-linear time series or maximum likelihood estimation procedures. Finally the validation stage involves diagnostic checking such as plotting the residuals to detect outliers and evidence of model fit.

In recent years time series models have become more sophisticated and attempt to model conditional heteroskedasticity with models such as ARCH (autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity) and GARCH (generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity) models frequently used for financial time series. In addition time series models are also used to understand inter-relationships among economic variables represented by systems of equations using VAR (vector autoregression) and structural VAR models.
Survival or duration analysis

Survival analysis is another name for time to event analysis. These techniques were primarily developed in the medical and biological sciences, but they are also widely used in the social sciences like economics, as well as in engineering (reliability and failure time analysis).

Censoring and non-normality, which are characteristic of survival data, generate difficulty when trying to analyze the data using conventional statistical models such as multiple linear regression. The normal distribution, being a symmetric distribution, takes positive as well as negative values, but duration by its very nature cannot be negative and therefore normality cannot be assumed when dealing with duration/survival data. Hence the normality assumption of regression models is violated.

The assumption is that if the data were not censored it would be representative of the population of interest. In survival analysis, censored observations arise whenever the dependent variable of interest represents the time to a terminal event, and the duration of the study is limited in time.

An important concept in survival analysis is the hazard rate, defined as the probability that the event will occur at time t conditional on surviving until time t. Another concept related to the hazard rate is the survival function which can be defined as the probability of surviving to time t.

Most models try to model the hazard rate by choosing the underlying distribution depending on the shape of the hazard function. A distribution whose hazard function slopes upward is said to have positive duration dependence, a decreasing hazard shows negative duration dependence whereas constant hazard is a process with no memory usually characterized by the exponential distribution. Some of the distributional choices in survival models are: F, gamma, Weibull, log normal, inverse normal, exponential etc. All these distributions are for a non-negative random variable.

Duration models can be parametric, non-parametric or semi-parametric. Some of the models commonly used are Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional hazard model (non parametric).
Classification and regression trees (CART)
Main article: decision tree learning

Globally-optimal classification tree analysis (GO-CTA) (also called hierarchical optimal discriminant analysis) is a generalization of optimal discriminant analysis that may be used to identify the statistical model that has maximum accuracy for predicting the value of a categorical dependent variable for a dataset consisting of categorical and continuous variables. The output of HODA is a non-orthogonal tree that combines categorical variables and cut points for continuous variables that yields maximum predictive accuracy, an assessment of the exact Type I error rate, and an evaluation of potential cross-generalizability of the statistical model. Hierarchical optimal discriminant analysis may be thought of as a generalization of Fisher's linear discriminant analysis. Optimal discriminant analysis is an alternative to ANOVA (analysis of variance) and regression analysis, which attempt to express one dependent variable as a linear combination of other features or measurements. However, ANOVA and regression analysis give a dependent variable that is a numerical variable, while hierarchical optimal discriminant analysis gives a dependent variable that is a class variable.

Classification and regression trees (CART) are a non-parametric decision tree learning technique that produces either classification or regression trees, depending on whether the dependent variable is categorical or numeric, respectively.

Decision trees are formed by a collection of rules based on variables in the modeling data set:

    Rules based on variables' values are selected to get the best split to differentiate observations based on the dependent variable
    Once a rule is selected and splits a node into two, the same process is applied to each "child" node (i.e. it is a recursive procedure)
    Splitting stops when CART detects no further gain can be made, or some pre-set stopping rules are met. (Alternatively, the data are split as much as possible and then the tree is later pruned.)

Each branch of the tree ends in a terminal node. Each observation falls into one and exactly one terminal node, and each terminal node is uniquely defined by a set of rules.

A very popular method for predictive analytics is Leo Breiman's Random forests.
Multivariate adaptive regression splines

Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) is a non-parametric technique that builds flexible models by fitting piecewise linear regressions.

An important concept associated with regression splines is that of a knot. Knot is where one local regression model gives way to another and thus is the point of intersection between two splines.

In multivariate and adaptive regression splines, basis functions are the tool used for generalizing the search for knots. Basis functions are a set of functions used to represent the information contained in one or more variables. Multivariate and Adaptive Regression Splines model almost always creates the basis functions in pairs.

Multivariate and adaptive regression spline approach deliberately overfits the model and then prunes to get to the optimal model. The algorithm is computationally very intensive and in practice we are required to specify an upper limit on the number of basis functions.
Machine learning techniques

Machine learning, a branch of artificial intelligence, was originally employed to develop techniques to enable computers to learn. Today, since it includes a number of advanced statistical methods for regression and classification, it finds application in a wide variety of fields including medical diagnostics, credit card fraud detection, face and speech recognition and analysis of the stock market. In certain applications it is sufficient to directly predict the dependent variable without focusing on the underlying relationships between variables. In other cases, the underlying relationships can be very complex and the mathematical form of the dependencies unknown. For such cases, machine learning techniques emulate human cognition and learn from training examples to predict future events.

A brief discussion of some of these methods used commonly for predictive analytics is provided below. A detailed study of machine learning can be found in Mitchell (1997).
Neural networks

Neural networks are nonlinear sophisticated modeling techniques that are able to model complex functions. They can be applied to problems of prediction, classification or control in a wide spectrum of fields such as finance, cognitive psychology/neuroscience, medicine, engineering, and physics.

Neural networks are used when the exact nature of the relationship between inputs and output is not known. A key feature of neural networks is that they learn the relationship between inputs and output through training. There are three types of training in neural networks used by different networks, supervised and unsupervised training, reinforcement learning, with supervised being the most common one.

Some examples of neural network training techniques are backpropagation, quick propagation, conjugate gradient descent, projection operator, Delta-Bar-Delta etc. Some unsupervised network architectures are multilayer perceptrons, Kohonen networks, Hopfield networks, etc.
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)

The Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) consists of an input and an output layer with one or more hidden layers of nonlinearly-activating nodes or sigmoid nodes. This is determined by the weight vector and it is necessary to adjust the weights of the network. The backpropagation employs gradient fall to minimize the squared error between the network output values and desired values for those outputs. The weights adjusted by an iterative process of repetitive present of attributes. Small changes in the weight to get the desired values are done by the process called training the net and is done by the training set (learning rule).
Radial basis functions

A radial basis function (RBF) is a function which has built into it a distance criterion with respect to a center. Such functions can be used very efficiently for interpolation and for smoothing of data. Radial basis functions have been applied in the area of neural networks where they are used as a replacement for the sigmoidal transfer function. Such networks have 3 layers, the input layer, the hidden layer with the RBF non-linearity and a linear output layer. The most popular choice for the non-linearity is the Gaussian. RBF networks have the advantage of not being locked into local minima as do the feed-forward networks such as the multilayer perceptron.
Support vector machines

Support Vector Machines (SVM) are used to detect and exploit complex patterns in data by clustering, classifying and ranking the data. They are learning machines that are used to perform binary classifications and regression estimations. They commonly use kernel based methods to apply linear classification techniques to non-linear classification problems. There are a number of types of SVM such as linear, polynomial, sigmoid etc.
Naïve Bayes

Naïve Bayes based on Bayes conditional probability rule is used for performing classification tasks. Naïve Bayes assumes the predictors are statistically independent which makes it an effective classification tool that is easy to interpret. It is best employed when faced with the problem of ‘curse of dimensionality’ i.e. when the number of predictors is very high.
k-nearest neighbours

The nearest neighbour algorithm (KNN) belongs to the class of pattern recognition statistical methods. The method does not impose a priori any assumptions about the distribution from which the modeling sample is drawn. It involves a training set with both positive and negative values. A new sample is classified by calculating the distance to the nearest neighbouring training case. The sign of that point will determine the classification of the sample. In the k-nearest neighbour classifier, the k nearest points are considered and the sign of the majority is used to classify the sample. The performance of the kNN algorithm is influenced by three main factors: (1) the distance measure used to locate the nearest neighbours; (2) the decision rule used to derive a classification from the k-nearest neighbours; and (3) the number of neighbours used to classify the new sample. It can be proved that, unlike other methods, this method is universally asymptotically convergent, i.e.: as the size of the training set increases, if the observations are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), regardless of the distribution from which the sample is drawn, the predicted class will converge to the class assignment that minimizes misclassification error. See Devroy et al.
Geospatial predictive modeling

Conceptually, geospatial predictive modeling is rooted in the principle that the occurrences of events being modeled are limited in distribution. Occurrences of events are neither uniform nor random in distribution – there are spatial environment factors (infrastructure, sociocultural, topographic, etc.) that constrain and influence where the locations of events occur. Geospatial predictive modeling attempts to describe those constraints and influences by spatially correlating occurrences of historical geospatial locations with environmental factors that represent those constraints and influences. Geospatial predictive modeling is a process for analyzing events through a geographic filter in order to make statements of likelihood for event occurrence or emergence.
Tools

Historically, using predictive analytics tools—as well as understanding the results they delivered—required advanced skills. However, modern predictive analytics tools are no longer restricted to IT specialists[citation needed]. As more organizations adopt predictive analytics into decision-making processes and integrate it into their operations, they are creating a shift in the market toward business users as the primary consumers of the information. Business users want tools they can use on their own. Vendors are responding by creating new software that removes the mathematical complexity, provides user-friendly graphic interfaces and/or builds in short cuts that can, for example, recognize the kind of data available and suggest an appropriate predictive model.[31] Predictive analytics tools have become sophisticated enough to adequately present and dissect data problems[citation needed], so that any data-savvy information worker can utilize them to analyze data and retrieve meaningful, useful results.[3] For example, modern tools present findings using simple charts, graphs, and scores that indicate the likelihood of possible outcomes.[32]

There are numerous tools available in the marketplace that help with the execution of predictive analytics. These range from those that need very little user sophistication to those that are designed for the expert practitioner. The difference between these tools is often in the level of customization and heavy data lifting allowed.

Notable open source predictive analytic tools include:

    Apache Mahout
    GNU Octave
    KNIME
    OpenNN
    Orange
    R
    RiskAoA
    scikit-learn
    Weka

Notable commercial predictive analytic tools include:

    Alpine Data Labs
    Angoss KnowledgeSTUDIO
    BIRT Analytics
    IBM SPSS Statistics and IBM SPSS Modeler
    KXEN Modeler
    Mathematica
    MATLAB
    Minitab
    LabVIEW[33]
    Neural Designer
    Oracle Advanced Analytics
    Pervasive
    Predixion Software
    RapidMiner
    RCASE
    Revolution Analytics
    SAP HANA[34] and SAP BusinessObjects Predictive Analytics[35]
    SAS and SAS Enterprise Miner
    STATA
    Statgraphics
    STATISTICA
    TeleRetail
    TIBCO

Beside these software packages, specific tools have also been developed for industrial applications. For example, Watchdog Agent Toolbox has been developed and optimized for predictive analysis in prognostics and health management applications and is available for MATLAB and LABVIEW[36][37]

The most popular commercial predictive analytics software packages according to the Rexer Analytics Survey for 2013 are IBM SPSS Modeler, SAS Enterprise Miner, and Dell Statistica <http://www.rexeranalytics.com/Data-Miner-Survey-2013-Intro.html 
>.
PMML

In an attempt to provide a standard language for expressing predictive models, the Predictive Model Markup Language (PMML) has been proposed. Such an XML-based language provides a way for the different tools to define predictive models and to share these between PMML compliant applications. PMML 4.0 was released in June, 2009.
Criticism

There are plenty of skeptics when it comes to computers and algorithms abilities to predict the future, including Gary King, a professor from Harvard University and the director of the Institute for Quantitative Social Science. [38] People are influenced by their environment in innumerable ways. Trying to understand what people will do next assumes that all the influential variables can be known and measured accurately. "People's environments change even more quickly than they themselves do. Everything from the weather to their relationship with their mother can change the way people think and act. All of those variables are unpredictable. How they will impact a person is even less predictable. If put in the exact same situation tomorrow, they may make a completely different decision. This means that a statistical prediction is only valid in sterile laboratory conditions, which suddenly isn't as useful as it seemed before." [39]
See also

    Criminal Reduction Utilising Statistical History
    Data mining
    Learning analytics
    Odds algorithm
    Pattern recognition
    Prescriptive analytics
    Predictive modeling
    RiskAoA a predictive tool for discriminating future decisions.


How do you go from a guess to a prediction? By using data to inform decisions about the future.

Predictive analytics allows you to discover, analyze and act on data. It’s about learning from the past to uncover trends and predict likely outcomes. But that’s not all. Predictive analytics gives you a framework to analyze data over time, leading to more refined outcomes and corrective actions.

And using data to create a coherent view of the future has never been more important. The convergence of big data, time series data, social media, sensor data and mobile devices gives you the potential to add more fuel to your predictive analytics engine. Now it’s up to you to collect, manage and analyze this information – and position your organization for success.
Analytics Insights
Analytics Insights
Connect with the latest insights on analytics through related articles and research.
More on predictive analytics

    Drive your business with predictive analytics
    Three steps to putting predictive analytics to work

How it works

Predictive analytics combines techniques from statistics, data mining and machine learning to find meaning from large amounts of data. Whether you’re in marketing, compliance, customer service, operations or any other business unit, your data can show where you are – and predict where you’re going.

How do organizations approach predictive analytics? The key stages for an analytical life cycle include:

    Analytical data preparation – Source, clean and prepare the data for optimal results.
    Visualization and exploration – Explore all data to identify relevant variables, trends and relationships.
    Statistical analysis – Use everything from simple descriptive statistics to complex Bayesian analysis to quantify uncertainty, make inferences and drive decisions.
    Predictive modeling – Build the predictive model using statistical, data mining or text mining algorithms, including the critical capability of transforming and selecting key variables.
    Model deployment – Apply the new champion model, once validated and approved, to new data.
    Model management and monitoring – Examine model performance to make sure it is up-to-date and delivering valid results.

Predictive analytics in action

Marketing – From telecommunications to education to gaming and beyond, organizations need to forecast customer responses or purchases. Predictive models enable businesses to discover and attract the most profitable customers, helping maximize value from their marketing budget.

Risk – Credit scores assess a buyer’s likelihood to default on purchases like cars, homes or insurance. Credit scores are numbers generated by a predictive model that incorporates all data relevant to creditworthiness. Predictive analytics has other risk-related uses as well, including claims, collections, fraud and security.

Operations – To make an organization more efficient, you need to understand future needs and anticipate demand. Manufacturers need to manage inventory and factory resources. Airlines must decide how many tickets to sell at each price for a flight. Hotels try to predict the number of guests they can expect on a given night. Predictive analytics is at the heart of all of these operational decisions.

Predictive analytics is the branch of the advanced analytics which is used to make predictions about unknown future events. Predictive analytics uses many techniques from data mining, statistics, modeling, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to analyze current data to make predictions about future. It uses a number of data mining, predictive modeling and analytical techniques to bring together the management, information technology, and modeling business process to make predictions about future. The patterns found in historical and transactional data can be used to identify risks and opportunities for future. Predictive analytics models capture relationships among many factors to assess risk with a particular set of conditions to assign a score, or weightage. By successfully applying predictive analytics the businesses can effectively interpret big data for their benefit.

The data mining and text analytics along with statistics, allows the business users to create predictive intelligence by uncovering patterns and relationships in both the structured and unstructured data. The data which can be used readily for analysis are structured data, examples like age, gender, marital status, income, sales. Unstructured data are textual data in call center notes, social media content, or other type of open text which need to be extracted from the text, along with the sentiment, and then used in the model building process.

Predictive analytics allows organizations to become proactive, forward looking, anticipating outcomes and behaviors based upon the data and not on a hunch or assumptions. Prescriptive analytics, goes further and suggest actions to benefit from the prediction and also provide decision options to benefit from the predictions and its implications

Predictive Analytics Process
1.Define Project:

Define the project outcomes, deliverables, scoping of the effort, business objectives, identify the data sets which are going to be used.
2.Data Collection:

Data Mining for predictive analytics prepares data from multiple sources for analysis. This provides a complete view of the customer interactions.
3. Data Analysis:

Data Analysis is the process of inspecting, cleaning, transforming, and modeling data with the objective of discovering useful information, arriving at conclusions.
4.Statistics:

Statistical Analysis enables to validate the assumptions, hypotheses and test them with using standard statistical models.
5.Modeling:

Predictive Modeling provides the ability to automatically create accurate predictive models about future. There are also options to choose the best solution with multi model evaluation.
6.Deployment:

Predictive Model Deployment provides the option to deploy the analytical results in to the every day decision making process to get results, reports and output by automating the decisions based on the modeling.
7.Model Monitoring:

Models are managed and monitored to review the model performance to ensure that it is providing the results expected.
Predictive Analytics Process

Predictive Analytics Process
Prescriptive Analytics

Prescriptive Analytics automatically automate complex decisions and trade offs to make predictions and then proactively update recommendations based on changing events to take advantage of the prediction.
Applications of Predictive Analytics
1. Customer relationship management (CRM)

Predictive analysis applications are used to achieve CRM objectives such as marketing campaigns, sales, and customer services. Analytical customer relationship management can be applied throughout the customers life cycle, right from acquisition, relationship growth, retention, and win back.
2. Health Care

Predictive analysis applications in health care can determine the patients who are at the risk of developing certain conditions such as diabetes, asthma and other lifetime illnesses. The clinical decision support systems incorporate predictive analytics to support medical decision making at the point of care.
3. Collection Analytics

Predictive analytics applications optimize the allocation of collection resources by identifying the effective collection agencies, contact strategies, legal actions to increase the recovery and also reducing the collection costs.
4. Cross Sell

Predictive analytics applications analyze customers spending, usage and other behavior, leading to efficient cross sales, or selling additional products to current customers for an organization that offers multiple products
5. Fraud detection

Predictive analytics applications can find inaccurate credit applications, fraudulent transactions both done offline and online, identity thefts and false insurance claims.
6. Risk management

Predictive analytics applications predicts the best portfolio to maximize return in capital asset pricing model and probabilistic risk assessment to yield accurate forecasts.
7.Direct Marketing

Predictive analytics can also help to identify the most effective combination of product versions, marketing material, communication channels and timing that should be used to target a given consumer.
8.Underwriting

Predictive analytics can help underwrite the quantities by predicting the chances of illness, default, bankruptcy. Predictive analytics can streamline the process of customer acquisition by predicting the future risk behavior of a customer using application level data.
Predicitve Analytics

Predicitve Analytics
Industry Applications

Predictive analytics is used in insurance, banking, marketing, financial services, telecommunications, retail, travel, healthcare, pharmaceuticals, oil and gas and other industries.
1.Predictive Analytics Software

SAS Predictive Analytics, IBM Predictive Analytics, SAP Predictive Analytics, RapidMiner, Angoss Predictive Analytics, GraphLab Create,  SAP InfiniteInsight, FICO Predictive Analytics, Salford Analytics, Oracle Data Mining (ODM), TIMi Suite, TIBCO Analytics, Alteryx Analytics, Alpine Chorus, KNIME, Actian Analytics Platform, Portrait, Predixion, Data Science Studio, H2O, Analytics Solver, STATISTICA, Viscovery Data Mining Suite, Lavastorm Analytics Engine, Rapid Insight Analytics, Advanced Miner, CMSR Data Miner Suite, GMDH Shell, Mathematica, MATLAB, and Minitab are some of the vendors of proprietary predictive analytics solutions in no particular order.

Click on the button below for a review of the top predictive analytics proprietary software solutions.

SAP Predictive Analytics

SAP Predictive Analytics

R, Orange, RapidMiner, Weka, GraphLab Create, Octave, Data Science Studio (DSS), H2O, Lavastorm Public Edition, Tanagra, PredictionIO, HP Distributed R, KNIME, scikit-learn, Actian Analytics Platform, Apache Spark MLlib, Apache Mahout, LIBLINEAR, Vowpal Wabbit, NumPy , and SciPy  are some of the key players in the freeware predictive analytics market in no particular order. Click on the button below for a review of the top predictive analytics freeware software solutions.

R

R
2.Predictive Analytics Software API

Google Prediction API, BigML, Microsoft Azure Machine Learning, Blue Yonder, Swift API, Datagami, GraphLab, Data Science Studio, Apigee Insights, Openscoring.io, Intuitics, Anomaly Detective, Zementis, Predixion, Datumbox Machine Learning Framework, PredictionIO, Logical Glue, Ersatz, H2O, Yottamine, Lattice, InsideView, AgilOne, Futurelytics, Fliptop, RelateIQ, Lumiata, Versium LifeData, Indico, INRIX are some of the Tops Predictive Analytics API in no particular order. Click on the button below for a  review of the top predictive analytics software API solutions:

Google Prediction API

Google Prediction API
3.Predictive Analytics Programs

DePaul University, Northwestern University, Lally School of Management, University of Cincinnati, Louisiana State University, North Carolina State University, Catholic University of America, Central Connecticut State University, Columbia University, George Washington University, Michigan State University, New York University, Bentley University, Carnegie Mellon University, Dublin City University, Drexel University, University of Maryland, University of Tennessee, University of Connecticut, Fordham University, University of San Francisco, University of Texas, Cornell University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Harrisburg University of Science and Technology, Brandeis University, Oklahoma State University and University of Miami are some of the top data science and predictive analytics programs.

You may also like to review the online business analytics programs list:
4.Predictive Lead Scoring Platforms

Lattice Engines, Fliptop, 6sense, Infer, Leadspace, Mintigo, Salesfusion, Versium, Wise, InsideSales, Lead Liaison, SalesPredict, Custora , Televerde, Futurelytics, Fiserv, Angoss KnowledgeSCORE, KXEN, Predixion, EverString are some of the companies who offer predictive lead scoring platforms in no particular order.

Infer

Infer
5.Predictive Pricing Solutions

Blue Yonder Dynamic Pricing , PROS Pricing Analytics, Zilliant MarginMax, Model N, ECOPA Prezzu, Upstream Commerce Dynamic Pricer, Retalon Dynamic Price Management System are some of the Predictive Pricing Solutions in no particular order.

6.Customer Churn, Renew, Upsell, Cross Sell Software Tools

RapidMiner, Marketo, Preact, Google Prediction API, Lattice Engines, Angoss, PROS Sales Optimizer, Fliptop , Alteryx Analytics, Alpine Chorus, 6sense, Gainsight, GraphLab Create, Predixion Insight, KNIME, Bluenose, Actian, RelateIQ, Zilliant, SalesPredict, Infer, AgilOne, Adobe Recommendations are some of the top customer churn, renew, upsell, cross sell software tools.


Predictive analytics is the practice of extracting information from existing data sets in order to determine patterns and predict future outcomes and trends.  Predictive analytics does not tell you what will happen in the future. It forecasts what might happen in the future with an acceptable level of reliability, and includes what-if scenarios and risk assessment.
Predictive Models and Analysis Applied to Business

Predictive models and analysis are typically used to forecast future probabilities. Applied to business, predictive models are used to analyze current data and historical facts in order to better understand customers, products and partners and to identify potential risks and opportunities for a company. It uses a number of techniques, including data mining, statistical modeling and machine learning to help analysts make future business forecasts.


Analysis of data is a process of inspecting, cleaning, transforming, and modeling data with the goal of discovering useful information, suggesting conclusions, and supporting decision-making. Data analysis has multiple facets and approaches, encompassing diverse techniques under a variety of names, in different business, science, and social science domains.

Data mining is a particular data analysis technique that focuses on modeling and knowledge discovery for predictive rather than purely descriptive purposes. Business intelligence covers data analysis that relies heavily on aggregation, focusing on business information. In statistical applications, some people divide data analysis into descriptive statistics, exploratory data analysis (EDA), and confirmatory data analysis (CDA). EDA focuses on discovering new features in the data and CDA on confirming or falsifying existing hypotheses. Predictive analytics focuses on application of statistical models for predictive forecasting or classification, while text analytics applies statistical, linguistic, and structural techniques to extract and classify information from textual sources, a species of unstructured data. All are varieties of data analysis.

Data integration is a precursor to data analysis, and data analysis is closely linked to data visualization and data dissemination. The term data analysis is sometimes used as a synonym for data modeling.

Contents

    1 The process of data analysis
        1.1 Data requirements
        1.2 Data collection
        1.3 Data processing
        1.4 Data cleaning
        1.5 Exploratory data analysis
        1.6 Modeling and algorithms
        1.7 Data product
        1.8 Communication
    2 Quantitative messages
    3 Techniques for analyzing quantitative data
    4 Analytical activities of data users
    5 Barriers to effective analysis
        5.1 Confusing fact and opinion
        5.2 Cognitive biases
        5.3 Innumeracy
    6 Other topics
        6.1 Analytics and business intelligence
        6.2 Education
    7 Practitioner notes
        7.1 Initial data analysis
            7.1.1 Quality of data
            7.1.2 Quality of measurements
            7.1.3 Initial transformations
            7.1.4 Did the implementation of the study fulfill the intentions of the research design?
            7.1.5 Characteristics of data sample
            7.1.6 Final stage of the initial data analysis
            7.1.7 Analysis
            7.1.8 Nonlinear analysis
        7.2 Main data analysis
            7.2.1 Exploratory and confirmatory approaches
            7.2.2 Stability of results
            7.2.3 Statistical methods
    8 Free software for data analysis
    9 See also
    10 References
        10.1 Citations
        10.2 Bibliography
    11 Further reading

The process of data analysis
Data science process flowchart

Analysis refers to breaking a whole into its separate components for individual examination. Data analysis is a process for obtaining raw data and converting it into information useful for decision-making by users. Data is collected and analyzed to answer questions, test hypotheses or disprove theories.[1]

Statistician John Tukey defined data analysis in 1961 as: "Procedures for analyzing data, techniques for interpreting the results of such procedures, ways of planning the gathering of data to make its analysis easier, more precise or more accurate, and all the machinery and results of (mathematical) statistics which apply to analyzing data."[2]

There are several phases that can be distinguished, described below. The phases are iterative, in that feedback from later phases may result in additional work in earlier phases.[3]
Data requirements

The data necessary as inputs to the analysis are specified based upon the requirements of those directing the analysis or customers who will use the finished product of the analysis. The general type of entity upon which the data will be collected is referred to as an experimental unit (e.g., a person or population of people). Specific variables regarding a population (e.g., age and income) may be specified and obtained. Data may be numerical or categorical (i.e., a text label for numbers).[3]
Data collection

Data is collected from a variety of sources. The requirements may be communicated by analysts to custodians of the data, such as information technology personnel within an organization. The data may also be collected from sensors in the environment, such as traffic cameras, satellites, recording devices, etc. It may also be obtained through interviews, downloads from online sources, or reading documentation.[3]
Data processing
The phases of the intelligence cycle used to convert raw information into actionable intelligence or knowledge are conceptually similar to the phases in data analysis.

Data initially obtained must be processed or organized for analysis. For instance, this may involve placing data into rows and columns in a table format for further analysis, such as within a spreadsheet or statistical software.[3]
Data cleaning

Once processed and organized, the data may be incomplete, contain duplicates, or contain errors. The need for data cleaning will arise from problems in the way that data is entered and stored. Data cleaning is the process of preventing and correcting these errors. Common tasks include record matching, deduplication, and column segmentation.[4] Such data problems can also be identified through a variety of analytical techniques. For example, with financial information, the totals for particular variables may be compared against separately published numbers believed to be reliable.[5] Unusual amounts above or below pre-determined thresholds may also be reviewed. There are several types of data cleaning that depend on the type of data. Quantitative data methods for outlier detection can be used to get rid of likely incorrectly entered data. Textual data spellcheckers can be used to lessen the amount of mistyped words, but it is harder to tell if the words themselves are correct.[6]
Exploratory data analysis

Once the data is cleaned, it can be analyzed. Analysts may apply a variety of techniques referred to as exploratory data analysis to begin understanding the messages contained in the data.[7][8] The process of exploration may result in additional data cleaning or additional requests for data, so these activities may be iterative in nature. Descriptive statistics such as the average or median may be generated to help understand the data. Data visualization may also be used to examine the data in graphical format, to obtain additional insight regarding the messages within the data.[3]
Modeling and algorithms

Mathematical formulas or models called algorithms may be applied to the data to identify relationships among the variables, such as correlation or causation. In general terms, models may be developed to evaluate a particular variable in the data based on other variable(s) in the data, with some residual error depending on model accuracy (i.e., Data = Model + Error).[1]

Inferential statistics includes techniques to measure relationships between particular variables. For example, regression analysis may be used to model whether a change in advertising (independent variable X) explains the variation in sales (dependent variable Y). In mathematical terms, Y (sales) is a function of X (advertising). It may be described as Y = aX + b + error, where the model is designed such that a and b minimize the error when the model predicts Y for a given range of values of X. Analysts may attempt to build models that are descriptive of the data to simplify analysis and communicate results.[1]
Data product

A data product is a computer application that takes data inputs and generates outputs, feeding them back into the environment. It may be based on a model or algorithm. An example is an application that analyzes data about customer purchasing history and recommends other purchases the customer might enjoy.[3]
Communication
Data visualization to understand the results of a data analysis.[9]
Main article: Data visualization

Once the data is analyzed, it may be reported in many formats to the users of the analysis to support their requirements. The users may have feedback, which results in additional analysis. As such, much of the analytical cycle is iterative.[3]

When determining how to communicate the results, the analyst may consider data visualization techniques to help clearly and efficiently communicate the message to the audience. Data visualization uses information displays such as tables and charts to help communicate key messages contained in the data. Tables are helpful to a user who might lookup specific numbers, while charts (e.g., bar charts or line charts) may help explain the quantitative messages contained in the data.
Quantitative messages
Main article: Data visualization
A time series illustrated with a line chart demonstrating trends in U.S. federal spending and revenue over time.
A scatterplot illustrating correlation between two variables (inflation and unemployment) measured at points in time.

Author Stephen Few described eight types of quantitative messages that users may attempt to understand or communicate from a set of data and the associated graphs used to help communicate the message. Customers specifying requirements and analysts performing the data analysis may consider these messages during the course of the process.

    Time-series: A single variable is captured over a period of time, such as the unemployment rate over a 10-year period. A line chart may be used to demonstrate the trend.
    Ranking: Categorical subdivisions are ranked in ascending or descending order, such as a ranking of sales performance (the measure) by sales persons (the category, with each sales person a categorical subdivision) during a single period. A bar chart may be used to show the comparison across the sales persons.
    Part-to-whole: Categorical subdivisions are measured as a ratio to the whole (i.e., a percentage out of 100%). A pie chart or bar chart can show the comparison of ratios, such as the market share represented by competitors in a market.
    Deviation: Categorical subdivisions are compared against a reference, such as a comparison of actual vs. budget expenses for several departments of a business for a given time period. A bar chart can show comparison of the actual versus the reference amount.
    Frequency distribution: Shows the number of observations of a particular variable for given interval, such as the number of years in which the stock market return is between intervals such as 0-10%, 11-20%, etc. A histogram, a type of bar chart, may be used for this analysis.
    Correlation: Comparison between observations represented by two variables (X,Y) to determine if they tend to move in the same or opposite directions. For example, plotting unemployment (X) and inflation (Y) for a sample of months. A scatter plot is typically used for this message.
    Nominal comparison: Comparing categorical subdivisions in no particular order, such as the sales volume by product code. A bar chart may be used for this comparison.
    Geographic or geospatial: Comparison of a variable across a map or layout, such as the unemployment rate by state or the number of persons on the various floors of a building. A cartogram is a typical graphic used.[10][11]

Techniques for analyzing quantitative data
See also: Problem solving

Author Jonathan Koomey has recommended a series of best practices for understanding quantitative data. These include:

    Check raw data for anomalies prior to performing your analysis;
    Re-perform important calculations, such as verifying columns of data that are formula driven;
    Confirm main totals are the sum of subtotals;
    Check relationships between numbers that should be related in a predictable way, such as ratios over time;
    Normalize numbers to make comparisons easier, such as analyzing amounts per person or relative to GDP or as an index value relative to a base year;
    Break problems into component parts by analyzing factors that led to the results, such as DuPont analysis of return on equity.[5]

For the variables under examination, analysts typically obtain descriptive statistics for them, such as the mean (average), median, and standard deviation. They may also analyze the distribution of the key variables to see how the individual values cluster around the mean.
An illustration of the MECE principle used for data analysis.

The consultants at McKinsey and Company named a technique for breaking a quantitative problem down into its component parts called the MECE principle. Each layer can be broken down into its components; each of the sub-components must be mutually exclusive of each other and collectively add up to the layer above them. The relationship is referred to as "Mutually Exclusive and Collectively Exhaustive" or MECE. For example, profit by definition can be broken down into total revenue and total cost. In turn, total revenue can be analyzed by its components, such as revenue of divisions A, B, and C (which are mutually exclusive of each other) and should add to the total revenue (collectively exhaustive).

Analysts may use robust statistical measurements to solve certain analytical problems. Hypothesis testing is used when a particular hypothesis about the true state of affairs is made by the analyst and data is gathered to determine whether that state of affairs is true or false. For example, the hypothesis might be that "Unemployment has no effect on inflation", which relates to an economics concept called the Phillips Curve. Hypothesis testing involves considering the likelihood of Type I and type II errors, which relate to whether the data supports accepting or rejecting the hypothesis.

Regression analysis may be used when the analyst is trying to determine the extent to which independent variable X affects dependent variable Y (e.g., "To what extent do changes in the unemployment rate (X) affect the inflation rate (Y)?"). This is an attempt to model or fit an equation line or curve to the data, such that Y is a function of X.

Necessary condition analysis 
(NCA) may be used when the analyst is trying to determine the extent to which independent variable X allows variable Y (e.g., "To what extent is a certain unemployment rate (X) necessary for a certain inflation rate (Y)?"). Whereas (multiple) regression analysis uses additive logic where each X-variable can produce the outcome and the X's can compensate for each other (they are sufficient but not necessary), necessary condition analysis (NCA) uses necessity logic, where one or more X-variables allow the outcome to exist, but may not produce it (they are necessary but not sufficient). Each single necessary condition must be present and compensation is not possible.
Analytical activities of data users

Users may have particular data points of interest within a data set, as opposed to general messaging outlined above. Such low-level user analytic activities are presented in the following table. The taxonomy can also be organized by three poles of activities: retrieving values, finding data points, and arranging data points.[12][13][14]
# 	Task 	General
Description 	Pro Forma
Abstract 	Examples
1 	Retrieve Value 	Given a set of specific cases, find attributes of those cases. 	What are the values of attributes {X, Y, Z, ...} in the data cases {A, B, C, ...}? 	- What is the mileage per gallon of the Audi TT?

- How long is the movie Gone with the Wind?
2 	Filter 	Given some concrete conditions on attribute values, find data cases satisfying those conditions. 	Which data cases satisfy conditions {A, B, C...}? 	- What Kellogg's cereals have high fiber?

- What comedies have won awards?

- Which funds underperformed the SP-500?
3 	Compute Derived Value 	Given a set of data cases, compute an aggregate numeric representation of those data cases. 	What is the value of aggregation function F over a given set S of data cases? 	- What is the average calorie content of Post cereals?

- What is the gross income of all stores combined?

- How many manufacturers of cars are there?
4 	Find Extremum 	Find data cases possessing an extreme value of an attribute over its range within the data set. 	What are the top/bottom N data cases with respect to attribute A? 	- What is the car with the highest MPG?

- What director/film has won the most awards?

- What Robin Williams film has the most recent release date?
5 	Sort 	Given a set of data cases, rank them according to some ordinal metric. 	What is the sorted order of a set S of data cases according to their value of attribute A? 	- Order the cars by weight.

- Rank the cereals by calories.
6 	Determine Range 	Given a set of data cases and an attribute of interest, find the span of values within the set. 	What is the range of values of attribute A in a set S of data cases? 	- What is the range of film lengths?

- What is the range of car horsepowers?

- What actresses are in the data set?
7 	Characterize Distribution 	Given a set of data cases and a quantitative attribute of interest, characterize the distribution of that attribute’s values over the set. 	What is the distribution of values of attribute A in a set S of data cases? 	- What is the distribution of carbohydrates in cereals?

- What is the age distribution of shoppers?
8 	Find Anomalies 	Identify any anomalies within a given set of data cases with respect to a given relationship or expectation, e.g. statistical outliers. 	Which data cases in a set S of data cases have unexpected/exceptional values? 	- Are there exceptions to the relationship between horsepower and acceleration?

- Are there any outliers in protein?
9 	Cluster 	Given a set of data cases, find clusters of similar attribute values. 	Which data cases in a set S of data cases are similar in value for attributes {X, Y, Z, ...}? 	- Are there groups of cereals w/ similar fat/calories/sugar?

- Is there a cluster of typical film lengths?
10 	Correlate 	Given a set of data cases and two attributes, determine useful relationships between the values of those attributes. 	What is the correlation between attributes X and Y over a given set S of data cases? 	- Is there a correlation between carbohydrates and fat?

- Is there a correlation between country of origin and MPG?

- Do different genders have a preferred payment method?

- Is there a trend of increasing film length over the years?
Barriers to effective analysis

Barriers to effective analysis may exist among the analysts performing the data analysis or among the audience. Distinguishing fact from opinion, cognitive biases, and innumeracy are all challenges to sound data analysis.
Confusing fact and opinion

You are entitled to your own opinion, but you are not entitled to your own facts.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan

Effective analysis requires obtaining relevant facts to answer questions, support a conclusion or formal opinion, or test hypotheses. Facts by definition are irrefutable, meaning that any person involved in the analysis should be able to agree upon them. For example, in August 2010, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that extending the Bush tax cuts of 2001 and 2003 for the 2011-2020 time period would add approximately $3.3 trillion to the national debt.[15] Everyone should be able to agree that indeed this is what CBO reported; they can all examine the report. This makes it a fact. Whether persons agree or disagree with the CBO is their own opinion.

As another example, the auditor of a public company must arrive at a formal opinion on whether financial statements of publicly traded corporations are "fairly stated, in all material respects." This requires extensive analysis of factual data and evidence to support their opinion. When making the leap from facts to opinions, there is always the possibility that the opinion is erroneous.
Cognitive biases

There are a variety of cognitive biases that can adversely effect analysis. For example, confirmation bias is the tendency to search for or interpret information in a way that confirms one's preconceptions. In addition, individuals may discredit information that does not support their views.

Analysts may be trained specifically to be aware of these biases and how to overcome them. In his book Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, retired CIA analyst Richards Heuer wrote that analysts should clearly delineate their assumptions and chains of inference and specify the degree and source of the uncertainty involved in the conclusions. He emphasized procedures to help surface and debate alternative points of view.[16]
Innumeracy

Effective analysts are generally adept with a variety of numerical techniques. However, audiences may not have such literacy with numbers or numeracy; they are said to be innumerate. Persons communicating the data may also be attempting to mislead or misinform, deliberately using bad numerical techniques.[17]

For example, whether a number is rising or falling may not be the key factor. More important may be the number relative to another number, such as the size of government revenue or spending relative to the size of the economy (GDP) or the amount of cost relative to revenue in corporate financial statements. This numerical technique is referred to as normalization[5] or common-sizing. There are many such techniques employed by analysts, whether adjusting for inflation (i.e., comparing real vs. nominal data) or considering population increases, demographics, etc. Analysts apply a variety of techniques to address the various quantitative messages described in the section above.

Analysts may also analyze data under different assumptions or scenarios. For example, when analysts perform financial statement analysis, they will often recast the financial statements under different assumptions to help arrive at an estimate of future cash flow, which they then discount to present value based on some interest rate, to determine the valuation of the company or its stock. Similarly, the CBO analyzes the effects of various policy options on the government's revenue, outlays and deficits, creating alternative future scenarios for key measures.
Other topics
Analytics and business intelligence
Main article: Analytics

Analytics is the "extensive use of data, statistical and quantitative analysis, explanatory and predictive models, and fact-based management to drive decisions and actions." It is a subset of business intelligence, which is a set of technologies and processes that use data to understand and analyze business performance.[18]
Education
Analytic activities of data visualization users

In education, most educators have access to a data system for the purpose of analyzing student data.[19] These data systems present data to educators in an over-the-counter data format (embedding labels, supplemental documentation, and a help system and making key package/display and content decisions) to improve the accuracy of educators’ data analyses.[20]
Practitioner notes

This section contains rather technical explanations that may assist practitioners but are beyond the typical scope of a Wikipedia article.
Initial data analysis

The most important distinction between the initial data analysis phase and the main analysis phase, is that during initial data analysis one refrains from any analysis that is aimed at answering the original research question. The initial data analysis phase is guided by the following four questions:[21]
Quality of data

The quality of the data should be checked as early as possible. Data quality can be assessed in several ways, using different types of analysis: frequency counts, descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, median), normality (skewness, kurtosis, frequency histograms, n: variables are compared with coding schemes of variables external to the data set, and possibly corrected if coding schemes are not comparable.

    Test for common-method variance.

The choice of analyses to assess the data quality during the initial data analysis phase depends on the analyses that will be conducted in the main analysis phase.[22]
Quality of measurements

The quality of the measurement instruments should only be checked during the initial data analysis phase when this is not the focus or research question of the study. One should check whether structure of measurement instruments corresponds to structure reported in the literature.
There are two ways to assess measurement

    Analysis of homogeneity (internal consistency), which gives an indication of the reliability of a measurement instrument. During this analysis, one inspects the variances of the items and the scales, the Cronbach's α of the scales, and the change in the Cronbach's alpha when an item would be deleted from a scale.[23]

Initial transformations

After assessing the quality of the data and of the measurements, one might decide to impute missing data, or to perform initial transformations of one or more variables, although this can also be done during the main analysis phase.[24]
Possible transformations of variables are:[25]

    Square root transformation (if the distribution differs moderately from normal)
    Log-transformation (if the distribution differs substantially from normal)
    Inverse transformation (if the distribution differs severely from normal)
    Make categorical (ordinal / dichotomous) (if the distribution differs severely from normal, and no transformations help)

Did the implementation of the study fulfill the intentions of the research design?

One should check the success of the randomization procedure, for instance by checking whether background and substantive variables are equally distributed within and across groups.
If the study did not need or use a randomization procedure, one should check the success of the non-random sampling, for instance by checking whether all subgroups of the population of interest are represented in sample.
Other possible data distortions that should be checked are:

    dropout (this should be identified during the initial data analysis phase)
    Item nonresponse (whether this is random or not should be assessed during the initial data analysis phase)
    Treatment quality (using manipulation checks).[26]

Characteristics of data sample

In any report or article, the structure of the sample must be accurately described. It is especially important to exactly determine the structure of the sample (and specifically the size of the subgroups) when subgroup analyses will be performed during the main analysis phase.
The characteristics of the data sample can be assessed by looking at:

    Basic statistics of important variables
    Scatter plots
    Correlations and associations
    Cross-tabulations[27]

Final stage of the initial data analysis

During the final stage, the findings of the initial data analysis are documented, and necessary, preferable, and possible corrective actions are taken.
Also, the original plan for the main data analyses can and should be specified in more detail or rewritten.
In order to do this, several decisions about the main data analyses can and should be made:

    In the case of non-normals: should one transform variables; make variables categorical (ordinal/dichotomous); adapt the analysis method?
    In the case of missing data: should one neglect or impute the missing data; which imputation technique should be used?
    In the case of outliers: should one use robust analysis techniques?
    In case items do not fit the scale: should one adapt the measurement instrument by omitting items, or rather ensure comparability with other (uses of the) measurement instrument(s)?
    In the case of (too) small subgroups: should one drop the hypothesis about inter-group differences, or use small sample techniques, like exact tests or bootstrapping?
    In case the randomization procedure seems to be defective: can and should one calculate propensity scores and include them as covariates in the main analyses?[28]

Analysis

Several analyses can be used during the initial data analysis phase:[29]

    Univariate statistics (single variable)
    Bivariate associations (correlations)
    Graphical techniques (scatter plots)

It is important to take the measurement levels of the variables into account for the analyses, as special statistical techniques are available for each level:[30]

    Nominal and ordinal variables
        Frequency counts (numbers and percentages)
        Associations
            circumambulations (crosstabulations)
            hierarchical loglinear analysis (restricted to a maximum of 8 variables)
            loglinear analysis (to identify relevant/important variables and possible confounders)
        Exact tests or bootstrapping (in case subgroups are small)
        Computation of new variables
    Continuous variables
        Distribution
            Statistics (M, SD, variance, skewness, kurtosis)
            Stem-and-leaf displays
            Box plots

Nonlinear analysis

Nonlinear analysis will be necessary when the data is recorded from a nonlinear system. Nonlinear systems can exhibit complex dynamic effects including bifurcations, chaos, harmonics and subharmonics that cannot be analyzed using simple linear methods. Nonlinear data analysis is closely related to nonlinear system identification.[31]
Main data analysis

In the main analysis phase analyses aimed at answering the research question are performed as well as any other relevant analysis needed to write the first draft of the research report.[32]
Exploratory and confirmatory approaches

In the main analysis phase either an exploratory or confirmatory approach can be adopted. Usually the approach is decided before data is collected. In an exploratory analysis no clear hypothesis is stated before analysing the data, and the data is searched for models that describe the data well. In a confirmatory analysis clear hypotheses about the data are tested.

Exploratory data analysis should be interpreted carefully. When testing multiple models at once there is a high chance on finding at least one of them to be significant, but this can be due to a type 1 error. It is important to always adjust the significance level when testing multiple models with, for example, a Bonferroni correction. Also, one should not follow up an exploratory analysis with a confirmatory analysis in the same dataset. An exploratory analysis is used to find ideas for a theory, but not to test that theory as well. When a model is found exploratory in a dataset, then following up that analysis with a confirmatory analysis in the same dataset could simply mean that the results of the confirmatory analysis are due to the same type 1 error that resulted in the exploratory model in the first place. The confirmatory analysis therefore will not be more informative than the original exploratory analysis.[33]
Stability of results

It is important to obtain some indication about how generalizable the results are.[34] While this is hard to check, one can look at the stability of the results. Are the results reliable and reproducible? There are two main ways of doing this:

    Cross-validation: By splitting the data in multiple parts we can check if an analysis (like a fitted model) based on one part of the data generalizes to another part of the data as well.
    Sensitivity analysis: A procedure to study the behavior of a system or model when global parameters are (systematically) varied. One way to do this is with bootstrapping.

Statistical methods

Many statistical methods have been used for statistical analyses. A very brief list of four of the more popular methods is:

    General linear model: A widely used model on which various methods are based (e.g. t test, ANOVA, ANCOVA, MANOVA). Usable for assessing the effect of several predictors on one or more continuous dependent variables.
    Generalized linear model: An extension of the general linear model for discrete dependent variables.
    Structural equation modelling: Usable for assessing latent structures from measured manifest variables.
    Item response theory: Models for (mostly) assessing one latent variable from several binary measured variables (e.g. an exam).

Free software for data analysis

    NCA Calculator 
    - a simple online calculator for finding necessary but not sufficient conditions in datasets
    NCA Software 
    - R package for finding necessary but not sufficient conditions in datasets
    Data Applied - an online data mining and data visualization solution.
    DataMelt - a multiplatform (Java-based) data analysis framework from the jWork.ORG 
    community of developers led by Dr. S.Chekanov
    DevInfo - a database system endorsed by the United Nations Development Group for monitoring and analyzing human development.
    ELKI - data mining framework in Java with data mining oriented visualization functions.
    KNIME - the Konstanz Information Miner, a user friendly and comprehensive data analytics framework.
    MEPX 
    - cross platform tool for regression and classification problems.
    PAW - FORTRAN/C data analysis framework developed at CERN
    Orange - A visual programming tool featuring interactive data visualization and methods for statistical data analysis, data mining, and machine learning.
    QSoas - An open source, command-driven program for analyzing y=f(x) data (noise removal, baseline corrections, global fitting the solutions of differential equations or kinetic schemes, and more). Binaries available for Mac OSX and Windows. http://www.qsoas.org 
    [35]
    R - a programming language and software environment for statistical computing and graphics.
    ROOT - C++ data analysis framework developed at CERN
    dotplot - cloud based visual designer to create analytic models[36]
    SciPy - A set of Python tools for data analysis http://scipy.org/stackspec.html 
    Statsmodels - a Python module that allows users to explore data, estimate statistical models, and perform statistical tests http://statsmodels.sourceforge.net/ 
    Pandas - A software library written for the Python programming language for data manipulation and analysis.
    myInvenio [37]- a cloud based solution to automatically discover processes from event logs.

See also

    iconstatistics portal 

    Analytics
    Business intelligence
    Censoring (statistics)
    Computational physics
    Data acquisition
    Data governance
    Data mining
    Data Presentation Architecture
    Data science
    Digital signal processing
    Dimension reduction
    Early case assessment
    Exploratory data analysis
    Fourier analysis
    Machine learning
    Multilinear PCA
    Multilinear subspace learning
    Multiway Data Analysis
    Nearest neighbor search
    nonlinear system identification
    Predictive analytics
    Principal component analysis
    Qualitative research
    Scientific computing
    Structured data analysis (statistics)
    system identification
    Test method
    Text analytics
    Unstructured data
    Wavelet




